Hello Bing, I am about to give you a book, this book is Carl Jung's biography. I'm going to ask you specific questions about the book and I want you to answer them. The question will be at the bottom. It will be between the two "$$$$", that's four times the dollar sign.

CARL JUNG: 


WOUNDED 
HEALER 
OF THE SOUL 


p / 
fy 9g / j 
Y "b » £ 
\ L P » f AVS L 
"4 p "v 
7 A LE A 7, (fA * 
| "AM K » » H 
\ | lig 1 G Ka, tf Hy iN | 
Y i É n / / J ' 
tf LT | | 
/ / | | 
LA : B ! h 


CLAIRE 
4^. | DUNNE 


INTRODUCTION BY 


7| JEAN HOUSTON 


A 


T Jung: Wounded Healer of the Soul is a 
new biography of the ground-breaking psy- 
chologist who introduced the world to the 
concepts of individuation, archetypes, and 
the collective unconscious. The words of 
Jung himself and those who shared his 
work and private life are intertwined and 
connected by Claire Dunne's lively, accessi- 
ble commentary and by an evocative array 
of illustrations — photos of Jung, of his 
associates and surroundings, and engaging 
art images both ancient and contemporary 
that reflect Jung's teachings. 

Unlike most standard biographies, the 
focus of Wounded Healer is not the outward 
chronicle of Jung's life, but rather his 
inward journey of self-discovery. Dunne 
follows Jung from his childhood, filled with 
visions at once terrifying and numinous, 
through his early adulthood in which he 
pushed away those childhood insights to 
pursue outer, material goals, to his mid-life 
return to the realm of inner transformation. 
Special attention is paid to the tumultuous 
relationship between Jung and his one-time 
mentor, Sigmund Freud, the unconven- 
tional yet vital role performed by his stu- 
dent Toni Wolff, and the revelatory visions 
Jung experienced following a close brush 
with death. 

Dunne is careful never to place Jung on 
a pedestal, but consistently portrays him 
(through her words, Jung’s own, and the 
descriptions of his contemporaries) as a 
human being, with all the strengths and 
frailties that accompany the human condi- 
tion. Here is a Jung who drives red convert- 
ibles — then retreats to the "primitive" 
sanctuary of Bollingen to chop his own fire- 
wood. Here is a Jung who plays childish 
games as much for his own enlightenment 
as for his children's entertainment. He is 
described as earthy, a “peasant,” compas- 
sionate, and humorous. Above all, Jung 
emerges through these pages as a healer 
whose skills arose from having first 
attended to the wounds in his own soul. 


CARL JUNG. 
WOUNDED HEALER 
OF THE SOUL 


CARL JUNG 
WOUNDED HEALER 
OF THE SOUT, 


An [llus va ed B agra hy 


Cr Arm E Dori 


E continu um 


CONTINUUM 

The Tower Building 
11 York Road 
London, SE1 7NX 


www.continuumbooks.com 


Copyright © 2000 PARABOLA Books 
Text © 2000 CLAIRE DUNNE 


All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or 
transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, 
including photocopying, recording, or any information storage and 
retrieval system, without permission from the publishers. 


First published in 2000. This edition published in 2003. 


British Library Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
A catalogue record of this book is available from the British Library. 


ISBN 0-8264-6307-X 


Printed in Italy 


This book. dedicated 
to the seeker in 
each one of us 

and 
to that 
which seeks us 


CONTENTS 


INTRODUCTION BY JEAN HOUSTON VII 


PART ONE 


Wounded 


PRELUDE 

THE CHILD 
ADOLESCENCE 13 
STUDIES 19 


First WORK 23 


EMMA 25 

JUNG AND FREUD 27 
DESCENT 45 

TONI 51 
BREAKTHROUGH 52 


PART TWO 


Healer 


PRELUDE 61 

PRIMAL CULTURES 65 
BOLLINGEN 71 

METAPHORS 72 

HISTORIC COUNTERPARTS 75 
REMINISCENCES 77 


THE INDIVIDUATION PROCESS 81 


HEALER AT WORK 91 
HELPERS: EMMA, TONI 101 
FAMILY LIFE 
REMINISCENCES 107 
STRIFE 111 


INDIAN SUMMER 


PART THREE 


Of the Soul 


VISIONS 125 

REMINISCENCES PosrT-WAR 132 
ANSWER TOJOB 141 

JUNG AND CHRISTIANITY 149 
SYNCHRONICITY 157 

LETTERS 166 

Toi 169 

Four DECADESON 175 


EMMA 179 
MYSTERIUM CONIUNCTIONIS 183 
LATE COMPANY 189 
MEMORIES, DREAMS, REFLECTIONS 194 
HuMAN BEING 196 
JUNG AND GOD 200 
Last WoRK 206 
SMALL COMFORT 
SELF-ASSESSMENT 212 


RETURN TO SOURCE 214 


NOTES 


Introduction 


Whunded Healer of the Soul is a luminous portrait of a great-souled 
one, a giant figure of the twentieth century. 

As a pioneering psychiatrist, Carl Jung extended his influence 
across an astonishing spectrum: medicine, psychology, art, litera- 
ture, religion, science, the humanities. His wide-ranging vision 
consistently pointed the way for much of what became the Human 
Potential Movement, depth psychology, a revolution in spiritual 
understanding, and an inclusive universal view of life and its 
purpose. 

In his own life he was, in many ways, a prototype of the human 
being still being forged in our time, an archetype of the emerging 
possible human that I observe struggling into being all over the 


world. That Jung’s work is a vital bridge linking East and West to. 


each other as well as to the North-South shamanic axis contributes 
immeasurably to this evolutionary development. In this regard he 
was one of the first to show how many members of European- 
derived cultures reveling in technique and objective mastery are 
sadly lacking in a spiritual awareness and subjective complexity 
found in aboriginal and indigenous cultures belonging to other 
stages of historical development. 

Jung’s own individuation process, so beautifully presented 
here, expresses with remarkable clarity and insight the psychic 
unfolding of his own transforming journey. This process, tracing as 
it does a self-realization of the psyche through experiencing its 
deeper layers and integrating them, brings us into a wholeness of 
being. It is at this point that we come into our own, our natural state 
of living equilibrium as earth-rooted and spiritually centered 
people who recognize the Source of our lives, the Ground of all 
Being, and are willing and able to serve its purposes in a co-creative 
manner. 

The possible human, as it is breathed into life, lives with a vast- 
ly expanded consciousness, which brings with it an armory of 
human skills and abilities, many-textured, multifaceted, and multi- 
dimensional. It is an evolutionary leap comparable to the 
changeover wrought by speech and writing for our ancestors. That 
state of being produces a new world, which in turn brings about a 
new state of being. As we see in this study, Jung embodied many of 
the aspects of the possible human. He lived fully in his body, had 
acute senses, was engaged by the world as artist and craftsman, 
had an excellent memory, thought in inward imageries, and expe- 


CARL TUNG 


WouNDED HEALER OF THE SOUL 


rienced subjective realities as strikingly as he knew objective ones. 
Consciousness for him was a continuum, the length and breadth of 
which he could travel at will. Throughout his long life he continued 
to discover the many cultures of his psyche, studying all manner of 
knowledge and wisdom that these cultures within provided. He 
had friends and allies in the inward and imaginal worlds, and 
taught his patients to discover the same, even to find the archetyp- 
al partner and companion of one’s depth reality. He regularly jour- 
neyed to those source places of his soul, partaking of the 
everlasting waters of life and spirit. It would seem he lived daily 
life as spiritual exercise, and his radiance, along with his empathy 
and down-to-earth presence, affected all who met him. Being more, 
as this richly telling account shows, he felt and cared more deeply 
about decay and degradation in the social and moral order. In spite 
of evidence to the contrary, he recognized others as god-in-hiding, 
and his vast array of techniques and understanding called them 
back to their own possible humanity. 

This book goes back to Jung’s own words in order to trace the 
human and spiritual journey of his long life. It is at the same time a 
brilliant synthesis of his core work, essentially the approach to the 
numinous via the path of deep psychological maturity. A series of 
illuminating reminiscences by friends, colleagues, and the occa- 
sionally met round out the fullness of the book’s portrait. The 
author, Claire Dunne, is a woman of startling beauty both of body 
and mind. She looks like Bridget, and talks like Athena. Her sensi- 
tivity of feeling for her subject allows us to meet Jung in all his 
diverse complexity — his contradictions and paradox, human fail- 
ings and strengths, his greatness and creativity. We meet a man at 
once transparent to transcendence but also earthy, practical, a 
craftsman of wood and stone as well as souls. 

More than almost any other, this book exposes us to vitalizing 
internal drives that underpinned Jung’s life and work, the arche- 
typal energies and mythic sensibilities that permeated him, leaving 
us with no doubt of their deep spiritual source, the Mystery of Mys- 
teries as he called it, or the Holy Mysterious as a Native American 
might say. Among the mysteries that Jung illumined in his work, 
and the ones that have so deeply spoken to me, is that of the myth- 
ic foundations of our local life. He showed that life is allied with 
myth in order that we may advance along an evolutionary path 
that carries us nearer to the spiritual source and into greater becom- 
ing. It is for this that myth remains closer than breathing, nearer 
than our hands and feet. I think it is built into our very being. Myth 
is not a no thing, an insubstantial conceptual will o' the wisp. It is 
coded into the cells and waters the seas of the unconscious. It 


INTRODUCTION 1X 


dwells in our little finger and plays along the spine as well as the 
spirit. It grants us access to the DNA of the human psyche, the 
source patterns originating in the ground of our being. It gives us 
the key to our personal and historical existence. Without mythic 
keys, as Jung continually showed, we would have no culture or 
religion, no art, architecture, drama, ritual, epic, social customs, or 
mental disorders. We would have only a gray world, with little if 
anything calling us forward to that strange and beautiful country 
that recedes even as we attempt to civilize it. 

This joining of local life to great life was one of Jung’s most pro- 
found achievements. It provides ways of moving from outmoded 
existence to an amplified life that is at once more cherished and 
more cherishing. As he wrote, “If we understand and feel that here 
in this life we already have a link with the infinite, desires and atti- 
tudes change. In the final analysis, we count for something only 
because of the essential we embody... .” When we descend into 
the forgotten knowings of earlier or deeper phases of our existence, 
we often find hidden potentials, the unfulfilled and unfinished 
seedings of what we still contain, which myth often disguises as 
secret helpers or mighty talismans. When the story I am working 
with involves finding talismans, I lead students into enactments 
aimed at rediscovering skills they had once known, lost perhaps in 
childhood — a capacity for art or music, for example, or even a 
sense of empathy. A psychology with a mythic or sacred base 
demands that we have the courage both to release old toxicities and 
diminishments and to gain access to our inner storehouse of capac- 
ities and use them to prepare ourselves for the greater agenda —— 
becoming an instrument through which the source may play its 
great music. But such is necessary if we are to return to everyday 
life with knowledge gained in the depths that can be put to use to 
redeem the "unread vision of the higher dream" inherent in both 
self and society. 

As Jung demonstrated, myths have such power because they 
are full of archetypes. Archetypes are many things — primal forms, 
codings of the deep unconscious, constellations of psychic energy, 
patterns of relationship. Our ancestors saw them in the heavens, 
prayed to them as Mother Earth, Father Ocean, Sister Wind. They 
were the great relatives from whom we were derived, and they 
gave us not only our existence, but also prompted our stories, elicit- 
ed our moral order. Later, they became personified in mythic char- 
acters and their stories — the contending brothers, the holy child, 
the search for the beloved, the heroic journey. As major organs of 
the psyche, archetypes give us our essential connections, and with- 
out them we would lose the gossamer bridge that joins spirit with 


X CARL ĪUNG 


Wornnen Haar ER or THE Sort 


nature, mind with body, and self with the metabody of the uni- 
verse. Archetypes, as Jung showed again and again, are organs of 
Essence, the cosmic blueprints of How It All Works. Because they 
contain so much, archetypes bewilder analysis and perhaps can 
only be known by direct experience. 

Claire Dunne’s book brings Jung vibrantly to life. That she 
enables us to hear so distinctly the challenge he gives us — to be 
complete, conscious, and modern human beings — is an accom- 
plishment that I can only applaud. 


JEAN HOUSTON 
June 2000 


INTRODUCTION XI 


Part One 
WOUNDED 


It is the truth, a force of nature that expresses itself through me — | am 
only a channel — I can imagine in many instances where | would 
become sinister to you. For instance, if life had led you to take up an 
artificial attitude, then you wouldn't be able to stand me, because | am 
a natural being. By my very presence | crystallize; | am a ferment. The 
unconscious of people who live in an artificial manner senses me as a 
danger. Everything about me irritates them, my way of speaking, my 
way of laughing. 
They sense nature.! 


OVERLEAF 
Self Portrait 


Painting by Francesco 
Clemente, 1982. 


OPPOSITE 


Dr. Carl Gustav Jung 
(1875-1961) in his garden 
at Küsnacht, Switzerland, 
1930. 


PART ONE: WOUNDED 


Prelude 


When Carl Gustav Jung spoke of himself as “a natural being,” he 
was sixty-six years old. By then he was world-famous and contro- 
versial, the first modern psychiatrist to recognize that the human 
psyche is “by nature religious” and to explore it in depth. A self- 
described “empiricist” and “healer of the soul,” he penetrated the 
inner reaches of himself and his patients, linked his experience to 
ancient writings and cultures worldwide, and offered his discover- 
ies to an uncomprehending world. 
In a letter he wrote, 


The main interest of my work is not concerned with the 
treatment of neurosis but rather with the approach to the 
numinous. . . [which] is the real therapy? 


Jung's work teaches that 


* Man needs to become his complete self to live whole. 
* God needs man to mirror his creation and help it evolve. 
* The whole human being is open to God as co-creator. 


People who knew Jung testify that he was a living example of 
his own psychology. At once human, fallible, and great, he lived in 
two worlds — earth-rooted and spiritually centered. Both "lives," 
outer and inner, he saw as the natural state of realized humanity. 

Jung's work reflects his life. Of himself he said, "I am the clash 
of opposites." Throughout a long life he learned to live and recon- 
cile those polarities into a unity of wholeness. 

At eighty-four he said of that long trek, 


The journey from cloud cuckoo land to reality lasted a long 
time. In my case Pilgrims Progress consisted in my having to 
climb down a thousand ladders until | could reach out my 
hand to the little clod of earth that | am? 


PRELUDE 3 


Jung's parents, Emilie 
Preiswerk (1848-1923) and 
Johann Paul Achilles Jung 
(1842-1896). 


Emilie encouraged Jung's 
interest in the occult; his 
father taught him Latin. 


4 CARL JUNG 


WOUNDED HEALER OF THE SOUL 


Carl Jung, c. 1882. 


Young Carl was an only 
child for nine years. 


PART ONE: WOUNDED 


The Child 


Late in life, Jung was deeply involved in compiling 
his “autobiography.” It is this book more than any 
other that attracts the general public to him. Titled 
Memories, Dreams, Reflections, it tells the reader little 
of Jung’s outer life. Instead the book graphi- 
cally portrays the geography of his inner landscape 
as both adult and child. 


While | am writing this 1 observe a little 
demon trying to abscond my words and 
even my thoughts and turning them over 
into the rapidly flowing river of images, surg- 
ing from the mists of the past, portraits of a 
little boy, bewildered and wondering at an 
incomprehensibly beautiful and hideously 
profane and deceitful world.* 


The little boy, for nine years the only child of Parson Paul Jung 
and his wife Emilie, was born in a small village in Kesswil, Switzer- 
land, in 1875. 


Dim intimations of trouble in my parents’ marriage hovered 
around me. My illness in 1878 must have been connected 
with a temporary separation of my parents. My mother 
spent several months in a hospital in Basel, and presumably 
her illness had something to do with the difficulty in the 
marriage. An aunt of mine, who was a spinster and some 
twenty years older than my mother, took care of me. | was 
deeply troubled by my mother’s being away. From then on, 
I always felt mistrustful when the word “love” was spoken. 
The feeling | associated with “woman” was for a long time 
that of innate unreliability. “Father,” on the other hand, 
meant reliability and — powerlessness. That is the handicap 
| started off with. Later these early impressions were 
revised; | have trusted men friends and been disappointed 
by them; and I have mistrusted women and was not 
disappointed.’ 


An early pattern that stayed with him all his life was an intense 
love of nature, a direct relationship with plants, animals, earth, 


Tue CHILO 5 


The Fish in the Forest 
Photograph by 

Rosalie Winard, 1981. 
Nature was the entry 


to contemplation and 
experience for Jung. 


rock, mountains, river and lake. A simple rustic lifestyle — and 
solitude. 


1 played alone, and in my own way. Unfortunately | cannot 
remember what I played; I recall only that I did not want to 
be disturbed. I was deeply absorbed in my games and could 
not endure being watched or judged while | played them. 


A childhood friend, Albert Oeri, remembered the impact this 
had on him. 


I suppose I saw Jung for the first time in my life when we 
were still very small boys. My parents were visiting his, and 
they wanted their little sons to play together. But it was no 
use. Carl sat in the middle of a room, busying himself with a 
little game of ninepins and not taking the least notice of me. 
Why do I even remember this encounter after some fifty- 
five years? Probably because | had just never run across such 
an asocial monster. | was brought up in an exuberantly 
crowded nursery, where you either played together or got 
beaten up, but either way you constantly associated with 
people; he was all by himself — his sister had not yet been 
born at that time." 


Jung's sister Gertrud was born when he was nine, too late and 


different in temperament to be a companion. The Jung family lived 
in frugal poverty in an eighteenth-century parsonage. The only 


&  Canr.TuNG WOUNDED HEALER OF THE Sc 


manmade beauty in the house was a 
couple of paintings in a dark room, 
which delighted the boy. His parents 
fulfilled community expectations of a 
pious Protestant minister and his 
helping wife in their outer life. Eight 
of Jung’s maternal uncles and two on 
his father’s side were parsons — all 
secure in their conventional world of 
faith, Bible, and good works. To the 
intensely sensitive and vulnerable 
Carl it was a suffocating atmosphere. 
He became accident-prone in a fatal 
resistance to this form of life. Spiritu- 
ally, too, it produced unintended 
results, which he recorded in Memo- 
ries, Dreams, Reflections: 


In the cemetery nearby, the 
sexton would dig a hole — 
heaps of brown, upturned 
earth. Black, solemn men in 
long frock coats with unusu- 
ally tall hats and shiny black 
boots would bring a black 
box. My father would be there 
in his clerical gown, speaking 
in a resounding voice. Women 


The Holy Face wept. | was told that someone was being buried in this hole 
Painting by Georges Roualt, in the ground. Certain persons who had been around pre- 
c. 1946. viously would suddenly no longer be there. Then | would 
The idea of Jesus shifted hear that they had been buried, and that Lord Jesus had tak- 
for Carl as he realized en them to himself. 

“those that Jesus had My mother had taught me a prayer which I had to say 
taken to himself” were every evening. I gladly did so. . . . 


never coming back. . . 
Spread out thy wings, Lord Jesus mild, 


And take to thee thy chick, thy child. . . . 


But now | was hearing that Lord Jesus "took" other peo- 
ple to himself as well, and that this "taking" was the same as 
putting them in a hole in the ground. . . . 

I began to distrust Lord Jesus. He lost the aspect of a big, 
comforting, benevolent bird and became associated with 
the gloomy black men in frock coats, top hats, and shiny 
black boots who busied themselves with the black box.? 


PART ONE: WOUNDED THE CHILD 


At about the same time, Jung encountered the black-robed fig- 
ure of a Jesuit priest whose appearance traumatized the boy. 
Impressions of Lord Jesus and the Jesuit combined to build the 
child’s distrust of outer aspects of religion, which resulted in a 
hatred of going to church. 

It was his dream world that connected him to his own internal 
spiritual network — guiding, informing, signalling the main trends 
of his life. He later said the early dreams of childhood usually give 
the tenor of a person’s life patterns, often working at several levels 
at the same time. 

Jung’s earliest remembered dream, at age three or four, was one 
he kept secret till his midsixties. This numinously tinged dream 
was situated in a meadow not far from his parents’ home. 


In the dream I was in this meadow. Suddenly | discovered a 
dark, rectangular, stone-lined hole in the ground. ... I ran 
forward curiously and peered down into it. Then | saw a 
stone stairway leading down. Hesitantly and fearfully, | 
descended. At the bottom was a doorway with a round 


8 CARL JUNG 


Le Palais des Rideaux 


Painting by René Magritte. 
The riddle of life and 
death was represented to 
the boy at funeral services 
conducted by his father: 
“Certain persons who had 
been around previously 
would suddenly no longer 
be there.” 


Celtic stone figure, 
Holzgerlingen, 
Württenburg, Germany, 
c. sixth century B.C.E. 


The prehistoric Celtic 
Horned Lord, Cernunnos, 
exhibits contained power 
and presence worthy of 
awe and veneration. 


WOUNDED HEALER OF THE SOUL 


arch, closed off by a green curtain. It was a big, heavy 
curtain of worked stuff like brocade, and it looked 
very sumptuous. Curious to see what might be hid- 
den behind, | pushed it aside. | saw before me in the 
dim light a rectangular chamber about thirty feet 
long. The ceiling was arched and of hewn stone. The 
floor was laid with flagstones, and in the center a red 
carpet ran from the entrance to a low platform. On 
this platform stood a wonderfully rich golden 
throne. | am not certain, but perhaps a red cushion 
lay on the seat. It was a magnificent throne, a real 
king's throne in a fairy tale. Something was standing 
on it which I thought at first was a tree trunk twelve 
to fifteen feet high and about one and a half to two 
feet thick. It was a huge thing, reaching almost to the 
ceiling. But it was of a curious composition: it was 
made of skin and naked flesh, and on top there was 
something like a rounded head with no face and no 
hair. On the very top of the head was a single eye, 
gazing motionlessly upward. 

It was fairly light in the room, although there 
were no windows and no apparent source of light. 
Above the head, however, was an aura of brightness. 
The thing did not move, yet I had the feeling that it 
might at any moment crawl off the throne like a 
worm and creep toward me. | was paralyzed with 
terror. At that moment | heard from outside and 
above me my mother's voice. She called out, "Yes, 
just look at him. That is the man-eater!" That intensi- 
fied my terror still more, and | awoke sweating and 
scared to death.? 


What was he to make of it? The dream haunted him for 
decades, its meaning discovered bit by bit over the years as 
he explored ancient writings and religions, the primal cul- 
tures of today and of prehistory. 


The phallus...a subterranean god "not to be 
named" 

... a ritual phallus 

...aninitiation into the secrets of the earth 

... that fearful tree of my childhood dream 

... revealed as “the breath of life,” the creative 
impulse.!? 


Part ONE: WOUNDED THECHILD 9 


It was in line with the powerful phallic deities of 
the Celtic, German, Greek, Egyptian, Middle and Far 
Eastern peoples, gods that are the embodiment of cre- 
ative life-bestowing power. Much of Jung’s lifework 
was to spring from these primitive and chthonic 
depths, emphasizing the maternal rather than the 
paternal principle. 


What happened then was a kind of burial in the 
earth, and many years were to pass before | 
came out again. Today ! know that it happened 
in order to bring the greatest possible amount 
of light into the darkness. It was an initiation 
into the realm of darkness. My intellectual life 
had its unconscious beginnings at that time." 


Outer life in the form of school shaped him further, 
adding to the gap between what the child was and 
what he tried to be to fit in with society. Jung desig- 
nated his outer adapting personality as No. 1, his 
essential inner nature as No. 2. This interplay of oppo- 
sites is played out in every individual to some degree, 
and in Jung to a more marked and conscious extent. 
Alone, he could sit contentedly on a stone and con- 
template in wonder whether it was he or he was it. Or 
he could light fires with his schoolfriends and feel the 
flames were of secret significance. But, increasingly, 
the contact with his country playmates produced 
other effects. 


| found that they alienated me from myself. 
When I was with them I became different from 
the way I was at home. I joined in their pranks, 
or invented ones which at home would never 
have occurred to me, so it seemed; although, 
as | knew only too well, | could hatch up all 
sorts of things when | was alone. It seemed to 
me that the change in myself was due to the 
influence of my schoolfellows, who somehow 
misled me or compelled me to be different 
from what | thought I was. The influence of this 
wider world, this world which contained others 
besides my parents, seemed to me dubious if 
not altogether suspect and, in some obscure 


10 Cart. TuNG 


WouNDED HEALER OF THE SOUL 


hii us 


Waning Moon #2 


Painting by Robert Graves, 
1943. 


As a child, Jung felt 
himself to be two distinct 
personalities: one 
outward and socially 
adapted, the other inward 
and essentially true. 


opposite: Wooden man- 
nikin, carved by Jung. 
Late in life, Jung created 
this depiction of the 
triple-aspected human 
being as body, feeling, 
and head, integrated 
through the repeated 
encircling arms. 


PART ONE: WOUNDED 


way, hostile. . . .[t was as if | sensed a splitting of myself, and 
feared it. My inner security was threatened. 2 


Instinctively, without knowing why, he counteracted the threat 
of society to his inner self. Secretly, he carved a little wooden 
mannikin about two inches long, inked him black, made him a 
wool coat, and put him in a pencil box prepared as a bed. He added 
a smooth, oblong, blackish stone which he painted into an upper 
and lower half in the manner of a “soulstone,” and which was also 
himself. 

With great satisfaction, he then hid it high in the attic. 


No one could discover my secret and destroy it. I felt safe, 
and the tormenting sense of being at odds with myself was 
gone. ... This possession of a secret had a very powerful 
formative effect on my character. . . . The little wooden fig- 
ure with the stone was a first attempt, still unconscious and 


THE CH: 


childish, to give shape to the secret. | was always absorbed 
by it and had the feeling | ought to fathom it; and yet I did 
not know what it was | was trying to express.1? 


The soulstone episode he later found to be akin to the traditions 
of ancient peoples like the Australian Aborigines and indigenous 
Africans. 

That was, he said, the “climax and close” of his childhood with 
its prevailing sense of the “eternal.” 


Africam mask, Punu people, 
Gabon, nineteenth century. 


A deep calm seems to emanate 
from the mask's nine-scaled 
central eye, which is also a 
flowering tree. 


12 CARL JUNG WOUNDED HEALER OF THE SOUL 


Teenaged Carl Jung, 
c. 1893. 

Carl faces the camera 
with confidence. 


PART ONE: WOUNDED 


Adolescence 


I n 1886, eleven-year-old Carl was enrolled in a sec- 
ondary school in Basel. In less protected and 
wealthier surroundings, he became aware of his 
financial poverty, bringing on "a horrible secret 
envy." 

The day-to-day routine world of education was 
background to a seesawing of diverging parts of his 
nature. At school his personality could be both sen- 
sitive to criticism and tactless to others, timidly self- 
effacing and fearlessly self-defensive with bullies, 
inwardly insecure and outwardly of superior confi- 
dence — the compensating swings of polarities not 
held in balance. Add to that oddish, not particular- 
ly popular, brilliant when interested but refusing to 
compete — a "troublemaker" to some. 

A feeling of being an "outsider" set in. Boredom 
with school and an accidental fall propelled him 
into a neurotic illness that let him stay home and 
solitary. In falling, the thought had flashed excus- 
ingly in his mind, "Now you won't have to go to 
school any more." Out of that experience he first 
discovered what a neurosis was. He stayed in it for 
half a year. Then his conscience, upon overhearing 
his father's worried fear that the boy might be 
epileptic and unable to support himself, pushed him to the realiza- 
tion, "Why, then, I must get to work," and into diligent study. 

In his imagination, Jung was two people at once — a powerful 
old man of the eighteenth century and also the poor twentieth- 
century schoolboy with holes in his socks who got good marks in 
other subjects but hated gymnastics, could draw only when in- 
spired and found mathematics "a torture." 

The algebraic proposition that “A=B” struck him as "a down- 
right lie or a fraud" to be equated with “sun=moon.” His mind 
needed deeper explanations than formulas to allay his "moral 
doubts" about mathematics. 

It was the same with religion when it was presented to him at a 
literal, dogmatic outer level. Divinity classes he found "unspeak- 
ably dull." "Lord Jesus" as taught remained an ambivalent figure, 
but the idea of God began to interest him, precisely because here 
was a mystery not easily fathomed, “a unique being of whom... it 
was impossible to form any correct conception." 


ADOLESCENCE 13 


A decisive experience on the way home from school aged 


twelve initiated him into new uncharted depths. 


14 


The sky was gloriously blue, the day one of radiant sunshine. 
The roof of the cathedral glittered, the sun sparkling from 
the new, brightly glazed tiles. | was overwhelmed by the 
beauty of the sight, and thought: “The world is beautiful and 
the church is beautiful, and God made all this and sits above 
it far away in the blue sky on a golden throne and. . . .” Here 
came a great hole in my thoughts, and a choking sensation. 
I felt numbed, and knew only, "Don't go on thinking now! 
Something terrible is coming, something | do not want to 
think, something | dare not even approach. Why not? 
Because | would be committing the most frightful of 
sins... ." 

On my long walk home ... | found my thoughts return- 
ing again and again to the beautiful cathedral which I loved 
so much, and to God sitting on the throne — and then my 
thoughts would fly off again as if they had received a pow- 
erful electric shock. | kept repeating to myself, "Don't think 
of it, just don't think of it!” | reached home in a pretty 
worked-up state. . . . 

That night I slept badly; again and again the forbidden 
thought, which I did not yet know, tried to break out, and | 
struggled desperately to fend it off. The next two days were 
sheer torture, and my mother was convinced | was ill. . . . 

On the third night, however, the torment became so 
unbearable that I no longer knew what to do. | awoke from 
a restless sleep just in time to catch myself thinking again 
about the cathedral and God. | had almost continued the 
thought! I felt my resistance weakening. Sweating with fear, 
I sat up in bed to shake off sleep. “Now it is coming; now it's 
serious! / must think. It must be thought out beforehand. 
Why should I think something | do not know? I don't want 
to, by God, that’s sure. But who wants me to? Who wants to 
force me to think something | don’t know and don’t want to 
know? Where does this terrible will come from? . . . 1 must 
find out what God wants with me, and | must find out right 
away. .. " For | was now certain that He was the author of 
this desperate problem. . . ."Can it be that He wishes to test 
my obedience by imposing on me the unusual task of doing 
something against my own moral judgment and against the 
teachings of my religion, and even against His own com- 
mandment, something | am resisting with all my strength 


CARL JUNG 


WOUNDED HEALER OF THE SOUL 


Invitation to the Soul 


Painting by Robert Taylor, 
1996. 


Jung's revelation showed 


him “God could be some- 


thing terrible." 


Part ONE: WOUNDED 


because | fear eternal damnation?". .. | thought it over 
again. . .. | gathered all my courage, as though I were about 
to leap forthwith into hell-fire, and let the thought come. I 
saw before me the cathedral, the blue sky. God sits on His 
golden throne, high above the world — and from under the 
throne an enormous turd falls upon the sparkling new roof, 
shatters it, and breaks the walls of the cathedral asunder. 
So that was it! I felt an enormous, an indescribable relief. 
Instead of the expected damnation, grace had come upon 
me, and with it an unutterable bliss such as ! had never 
known. | wept for happiness and gratitude. The wisdom and 


ADOLESCENC 


goodness of God had been revealed to me now that | had 
yielded to his inexorable command. It was as though | had 
experienced an illumination. . . . 

From that moment... my true responsibility began. 
Why did God befoul His cathedral? That, for me, was a ter- 
rible thought. But then came the dim understanding that 
God could be something terrible. | had experienced a dark 
and terrible secret. It overshadowed my whole life. . . . 

It would never have occurred to me to speak of my 
experience openly, nor of my dream of the phallus in the 
underground temple, nor of my carved mannikin. . . . 

My entire youth can be understood in terms of this 
secret. It induced in me an almost unendurable loneliness. 
... Thus the pattern of my relationship to the world was 
already prefigured: today as then I am a solitary, because | 
know things and must hint at things which other people do 
not know, and usually do not even want to know.'^ 


The old man, looking back, would say this experience had been 
"the guiding light" of his life. Teenage Carl still had to live with a 
personality which compensated for insecurity with an outer show 
of superior confidence. By fifteen he was given to violent rages, 
part of what he would later describe as his rather "bellicose" 
nature. In the midst of growing differentiation from his parents 
there could also be seen the generation legacy Jung was carrying 
into adulthood from them. 

Both parents demonstrated the doubleness of being, the natu- 
ral and adaptive, that can be particularly marked in tight, rigidly 
controlled, conventional societies. Outwardly Emilie Jung was a 
large, humorous, and kindly housewife, a good cook with conven- 
tional opinions and an undeveloped "literary gift,” a “ready lis- 
tener" and chatty talker combined. Underneath, a deeper, more 
powerful nature showed itself in sudden shifts to a penetrating 
observer whose utterances often influenced her son. 


What she said on those occasions were so true and to the 
point that | trembled before it. . . . There was an enormous 
difference between my mother's two personalities. . . . By 
day she was a loving mother, but at night she seemed 
uncanny. Then she was like one of those seers who is at the 
same time a strange animal, like a priestess in a bear's cave. 
Archaic and ruthless; ruthless as truth and nature. At such 
moments she was the embodiment of what I have called the 
“natural mind.” 


16 CARL JUNG 


WOoUNDED HEALER OF THE SOU 


Emilie Preiswerk Jung. 


Jung's identification with 
his mother caused him to 
see her too as having a 
dual nature: “By day she 
was a loving mother, but 
at night she seemed 
uncanny.” 


Part ONE: WOUNDED 


I too have this archaic nature, and in me it is linked with 
the gift — not always pleasant — of seeing people and 
things as they are. | can let myself be deceived from here to 
Tipperary when I don't want to recognize something, and 
yet at bottom | know quite well how matters really stand. 
... This “insight” is based on instinct, or on a “participation 
mystique" with others.'5 


If mother and son were to some extent alike, they were close 
only to a point. Emilie treated young Carl "like a grownup," con- 
fiding in him things she couldn't tell her husband in their ambiva- 
lent married state. Even as a child, Jung withheld from her the 
"secret" life he didn't understand in himself, because "my confi- 
dence in her was strictly limited." 

With adolescence, the dominance of parental relationship for 
Carl shifted from mother to father. At six he'd learned Latin from 


ADOLESCENCE 17 


his linguistically gifted father and, during a time when his parents 
slept apart, he’d shared a bedroom with him. It was to this “dear 
and generous father” that Carl looked for mental communion and 
found instead his parent’s unresolved complexities. 

Paul Jung was a pastor of the Swiss Reformed Church Evangel- 
ical, a man quiet and unassuming in public and increasingly quar- 
relsome and bad-tempered in private. Along with the uneasy 
atmosphere generated by marital difficulties, his son felt a hollow- 
ness in his father’s religious life which deeply disappointed his 
own lively questing. His father's religious instruction for Carl's 
confirmation "bored me to death." Belief without understanding 
seemed to be required. 


At that time, too, there arose in me profound doubts about 
everything my father said. When I heard him preaching 
about grace ... what he said sounded stale and hollow, 
like a tale told by someone who knows it only by hearsay 
and cannot quite believe it himself. . . . Later, when | was 
eighteen years old, | had many discussions with my father 
... but [they] invariably came to an unsatisfactory end. . .. 
“Oh nonsense," he was in the habit of saying, “you always 
want to think. One ought not to think, but believe.” | would 
think, “No, one must experience and know,” but | would say, 
“Give me this belief,” whereupon he would shrug and turn 
resignedly away.!e 


+2 CARL JUNG 


Lamentation of Orpheus 


Painting by Alexandre 
Seon, 1896. 


The sensitive schoolboy 
felt cast ashore, alone 
with his inner muse. In 
contrast to his father’s 
insistence on belief above 
all, Jung thought, “One 
must experience and 
know.” 


WouNDED HEALER OF THE SOUL 


PART ONE: WOUNDED 


Studies 


Wan no one to trust with his “secrets,” teenage Carl’s No. 2 
personality — that of “God’s world” and the “eternal” — began 
to fall into lonely isolation and No. 1 to take foreground. The 
now-studious Carl became an omnivorous reader of philosophy, 
had many clashes with his father, stopped going to church, and 
enrolled at the University of Basel, with the help of a grant, in 1895. 

That was also the year an increasingly depressed Paul Jung was 
diagnosed with cancer, and died with Carl at his side. His father’s 
death, as well as conferring on him responsibility as family man- 
ager, also liberated something else in his nineteen-year-old self. 
Later in life, Carl Jung was to call it the persona; the poet Yeats 
dubbed it the mask. To Jung’s fellow students at University it was 
an astonishing change. The countrified bookworm suddenly joined 
in the swing of campus life and, as Albert Oeri recalled, came to be 
known as "The Barrel." l 


He seldom got drunk, but when he did he was loud. In the 
beginning he did not think much of Zofingia dances, idling 
about with the girls and such romantic stuff. But then he dis- 
covered that he was really quite a good dancer. At a large 
party in Zofingen ...he danced past and fell apparently 
hopelessly in love with a young French-speaking girl. The 
next morning he went into a shop, asked for two wedding 
rings, laid twenty centimes on the counter, said thank you 
very much, and was about to leave. But the owner stam- 
mered something about the rings costing so and so many 
francs. Then Jung gave them back, picked up his twenty 
centimes again and left the store, cursing the proprietor 
who had the nerve to keep him from getting engaged just 
because he happened to have no more than twenty cen- 
times. The groom was very embarrassed, but he did not 
take up the subject again, and so “the Barrel” went on for 
quite a few more years without getting engaged.'” 


Jung described his student days as “intellectually alive” and “a 
time of friendships.” With a directional push from his dream life he 
had elected to study medicine, adding on science, philosophy, 
archeology, and history. He said yes to Plato, Pythagoras, Heracli- 
tus, Empedocles; no to the Aristotelian intellectualism of St. 
Thomas Aquinas and the Schoolmen. In Meister Eckhart he “felt a 
breath of life,” somewhat fainter in Schopenhauer and Kant. 


STUDIES 19 


Faust in His Study 
Etching by Rembrandt van 
Rijn, seventeenth century. 


“Two souls alas! Dwell in 
my breast!” Goethe, 
Faust, Part I. 


Goethe’s Faust was a distinct influence, awakening in him the prob- 
lem of opposites. Authorities like Zollner, Crookes, and “the seven 
volumes” of Swedenborg confirmed psychic phenomena as a new 
field meriting lifelong interest. 

Avid reading told him the same psychic incidents were being 
reported in cultures worldwide — stories his country childhood 
had taken for granted: dreams foreseeing death, clocks stopping on 
its arrival, animals with a prior sense of storms and earthquakes, 
experiences of ghostly presences. Jung’s own family history 
recounted generations of psychically sensitive individuals. Now, 


20 CARLJUNG WOUNDED HEALER OF THE SOUL 


with Héléne Preiswerk, a young female relative, as medium, he 
investigated séances. At home, a solid table split unexplainedly; a 
knife in a drawer broke into four pieces. 

All thought-provoking for Jung. 


The observations of the spiritualists, weird and questionable 
as they seemed to me, were the first accounts | had seen of 
objective psychic phenomena. . . . For myself 1 found such 
possibilities extremely interesting and attractive. They 
added another dimension to my life; the world gained 
depth and background.? 


The cost of that new interest was observed by fellow students. 
“Jung will make a great storyteller yet,” said one commen- 


tator with a laugh. But that was really what roused him to 
anger or even insults — when he was not taken seriously, 


Héléne Preiswerk. not understood.'? 
Jung's cousin, served as 
a medium in séances | will not deny that Jung underwent a severe test of per- 


attended by the family. In 
a trance, she described a 
mandala, which Jung 
then drew. 


sonal courage when he studied spiritualistic literature, did a 
good deal of experimentation in that field, and stood by his 
convictions unless they were modified by more psycholog- 
ical studies. He was up in arms when the official science of 
the day simply denied the existence of occult phenomena 
instead of investigating and trying to explain them.”° 


Jung’s doctoral thesis was titled On the Psychology and Pathology 
of So-Called Occult Phenomena, with his cousin Hélène as his 
research subject. Her abilities as a medium served as early pointers 
for Jung toward his discovery of the unconscious. Jung's autobiog- 
raphy details the twin pulls in him at that time: 


What appealed to me in science were the concrete facts 
and their historical background, and in comparative religion 
the spiritual problems, into which philosophy also entered. 
In science | missed the factor of meaning; and in religion, 
that of empiricism. Science met, to a very large extent, the 
needs of No. 1 personality, whereas the humane or histori- 
cal studies provided beneficial instruction for No. 2. 

Torn between these two poles, | was for a long time 
unable to settle on anything. 2! 


What was he to specialize in professionally? How to reconcile 
diverse interests into one prime study? It was the opening pages of 


PART ONE: WOUNDED STUDIES 


a book by Kraft Ebbing which had 
first pointed him unmistakably 
to the then despised arena of 


psychiatry. 


My heart suddenly began 
to pound. | had to stand 
up and draw a deep 
breath. My excitement was 
intense, for it had become 
clear to me, in a flash of 
illumination, that for me 
the only possible goal was 
psychiatry. Here alone the 
two currents of my interest 
could flow together and in 
a united stream dig their 
own bed. Here was the 
empirical field common to 
biological and spiritual 
facts, which 1 had every- 
where sought and no- 
where found. Here at last 
was the place where the 
collision of nature and 
spirit became a reality.?? 


Reactions to his choice from 
teacher and fellow students was 
"amazement and disappoint- 
ment." Once again he began to 
feel like an outsider, "the old 
wound ... began to ache again,” 
but the years of study had grown 
enough confidence in him that he 
could add "but now I understand 
why." 


22  CARLÍUNG 


Landscape 


Aquatint by Georges 
Rouault, 1938. 


Between the poles of 
science and religion was 
psychiatry, "the place 
where the. . .collision of 
nature and spirit became 
a reality" 


WOUNDED HEALER OF THE SOUL 


Jung’s diploma (1900) from 
the Burghólzli Clinic of 
the University of Zürich. 
Jung said this helped 
guarantee him a normal 
existence in times of 

inner strife. 


PART ONE: WOUNDED 


First Work 


At twenty-five Jung entered his “years of apprenticeship” at 
Burghólzli Hospital in Zürich as an assistant to its director. A rapid 
series of promotions elevated him to Deputy Director of the Hos- 
pital and lecturer in Ziirich University. His innovative work on 
dementia praecox (schizophrenia) and complexes attracted attention, 
especially in America, bringing in private patients. 

From the outset the twenty-five-year-old assistant at Burghólzli 
Hospital related to patients and their psychic disorders in his own 
way. Unlike most practitioners of his day, he actually listened to 
their personal stories, paid attention to the context of their fan- 
tasies, discussed their dreams, and developed further a word asso- 
ciation method in the process. ~ 


Dominating my interests and research was the burning 
question: “What actually takes place inside the mentally ill?” 
... Psychiatry teachers were not interested in what the 
patient had to say, but rather in how to make a diagnosis or 
how to describe symptoms and to compile statistics. From 
the clinical point of view which then prevailed, the human 
personality of the patient, his individuality, did not matter at 
all... . Patients were labeled, rubber-stamped with a diag- 
nosis and, for the most part, that settled the matter. The psy- 
chology of the mental patient played no role whatsoever.?? 


Bgweiserife AMiSaenoffeufdjaft 


Diplom 
Madsen We eKa:l dun Le 
regleseutari]dye Prifang rer Ansfifang der A Prazio vor See Pritfunge-Rewmilles pa 132 
Hetanton Gat, mirò ifen Giov Sie Berechtigesg evicill, fetan Bernl ala 
o Best *- 


ta allen Jucdeurs Per ddpedi) te dieniipet Pon ft | tre Donkie mm M odibribmónet MATT eiriad Mir Priit den 
MiMeesirrirees is dar [Dorain Fapa iita ruri iau 


Bera, den 29. Movenbee pe 
"A 


: 
| 
1 [e e 
E ot oaks — 
Me 1 CRUS gee 


First WORK 23 


24 


Through my work with the patients | realized that paranoid 
ideas and hallucinations contain a germ of meaning. A per- 
sonality, a life history, a pattern of hopes and desires lie 
behind the psychosis. The fault is ours if we do not under- 
stand them....At bottom we discover nothing new and 
unknown in the mentally ill; rather, we encounter the sub- 
stratum of our own natures.?^ 


| treat every patient as individually as possible, because the 
solution of the problem is always an individual one. Univer- 
sal rules can be postulated only with a grain of salt. A psy- 
chological truth is valid only if it can be reversed. A solution 
which would be out of the question for me may be just the 
right one for someone else. ... The crucial point is that I 
confront the patient as one human being to another.” 


In therapy the problem is always the whole person, never 


the symptom alone. We must ask questions which challenge 
the whole personality.?6 


CARL JUNG 


WOUNDED HEALER OF THE SOUL 


Emma 


Í n his autobiography Jung says that the 
strongest element in his nature was “a 
passionate urge towards understanding.” 
His own basic psychology he defined as 
primarily intuitive and intellectual. An 
intuitive knowing that penetrated through 
the everyday observable realities was a 
marked feature of his life, professionally 
and personally. At age twenty-one, while 
making a social call, he glimpsed a four- 
teen-year-old schoolgirl in pigtails on the 
stairs. Like a flash it was clear to him: This 
is my wife! 


Wedding photograph of I was deeply shaken by this, for | had really only seen her for 
Carl and Emma Jung, a brief instant, but | knew immediately with absolute cer- 

c. 1903. tainty that she would be my wife.27 

Emma was twenty-one 

and Jung was twenty-eight Six years later Emma Rauschenbach refused the young doctor's 
ae of their first proposal of marriage, but said yes to the second. Their unpub- 


lished love letters have, according to one reader, "romantic beauty 
and sentimental charm." Their marriage, in 1903, produced four 
daughters and a son. 

Emma, described as quiet, clever, and self-possessed, began to 
assist Jung professionally even early in their marriage. Her engag- 
ing manner and spontaneous gaiety were distinct assets socially. 
Her dowry, from a well-to-do manufacturing family, meant finan- 
cial difficulty was past for Jung. Over the front door of the house 
they built in Küsnacht were carved, in Latin, the words of the Del- 
phic Oracle: "Invoked or not invoked, the god will be present." 

Jung's published letters to Emma are mostly about his profes- 
sional travels — vivid impressions of people, places, and nature, 
eloquent and humorous. This from the steamer Kaiser Wilhelm der 
Grosse on a stormy Atlantic crossing: 


Outside from time to time a wave thundered against the 
ship. The objects in my cabin had all come to life: the sofa 
cushion crawled about on the floor in the semi-darkness; a 
recumbent shoe sat up, looked around in astonishment, and 
then shuffled quietly off under the sofa; a standing shoe 
turned wearily on its side and followed its mate. Now the 


Part ONE: WOUNDED EMMA 25 


scene changed. | realized that the shoes 
had gone under the sofa to fetch my bag 
and briefcase. The whole company parad- 
ed over to join the big trunk under the 
bed. One sleeve of my shirt on the sofa 
waved longingly after them, and from 
inside the chests and drawers came rum- 
bles and rattles. Suddenly there was a ter- 
rible crash under my floor, a rattling, 
clattering and tinkling. One of the 
kitchens is underneath me. There, at one 
blow, five hundred plates had been awak- 
ened from their deathlike torpor and with 
a single bold leap had put a sudden end to 
their dreary existence as slaves. In all the 
cabins round about, unspeakable groans 
betrayed the secrets of the menu. | slept 
like a top, and this morning the wind is 
beginning to blow from another side . . . . 

What has man to say here, especially at 
night when the ocean is alone with the 
starry sky? One looks out silently, surren- 
dering all self-importance, and many old 
sayings and images scurry through the 
mind; a low voice says something about 
the age-oldness and infinitude of the “far-swelling mur- 
murous sea,” of “the waves of the sea and of love,” of 
Leukothea, the lovely goddess who appears in the foam of 
the seething waves to travel-weary Odysseus and gives him 
the pearly veil which saves him from Poseidon’s storm. The 
sea is like music; it has all the dreams of the soul within itself 
and sounds them over. The beauty and grandeur of the sea 
consists in our being forced down into the fruitful bottom- 
lands of our own psyches, where we confront and re-create 
ourselves. . . 28 


26  CARLTUNG 


Front door of Jung's house 
in Küsnacht. 


Over the front door is 
written, "Vocatus atque 
non vocatus deus aderit." 
(“Invoked or not invoked, 
the god will be present.") 


WOUNDED HEALER OF THE SOUL 


Jung and Freud 


Jung at that stage was returning from a visit to America with Sig- 
mund Freud, whom he described as "the first man of real impor- 
tance in my life." It was 1909, the year after the First International 
Psychoanalytic Congress in Salzburg. Both had been invited to 
speak in Massachusetts, and both been appointed honorary Doc- 
tors of Law at Clark University. 

He wrote to his wife, 


World conference of 


psychologists, Clark Now I may place an L.L.D. after my name. Impressive, what? 
University, Worcester, . .. Freud is in seventh heaven, and I am glad with all my 
Massachusetts, 1909. heart to see him so.?? 

Jung (front row, third from 

right) lectured on a word- Jung, a successful senior physician, author, and lecturer in 
association experiment. Switzerland, had publicly supported the pioneering Freud in years 


Sigmund Freud, on Jung's 
right, described the 
psychoanalytic method. 
Both men received 


when it was damaging academically to do so. 
Freud, "in splendid isolation," had founded the psychoanalytic 
movement near the turn of the century in Vienna. It was his 1905 


honorary doctorates from. findings on the sexual instinct in childhood that brought “the max- 
Clark University. imum of odium" on Freud's name. 


Part ONE: WOUNDED JUNG AND FREUD 27 


In the early 1900s Jung read Freud’s groundbreaking book The 
Interpretation of Dreams and “discovered how it all linked up with 
my own ideas.” He began to cite Freud’s writings in his work. A 
correspondence began in 1906 after Jung sent Freud a publication 
of his own. Yet even in the first letter from Jung, a major difference 


between them was foreshadowed. 


[It seems to me that though the genesis of hysteria is 
predominantly, it is not exclusively, sexual. I take the same 
view of your sexual theory.?? 


Dear Colleague, 

Your writings have long led me to suspect that your appre- 
ciation of my psychology does not extend to all my views on 
hysteria and the problem of sexuality, but | venture to hope 
that in the course of the years you will come much closer to 
me than you now think possible. . . . 

Yours very sincerely, 

Dr. Freud?! 


Jung’s book on schizophrenia was published the following year, 
the introduction acknowledging "how much I am indebted to the 
brilliant discoveries of Freud," while stressing "one can very well 
maintain an independent judgment." It led to the two men meeting 


for the first time at Freud's home in Vienna. 


28 


We met at one o'clock in the afternoon and talked virtually 
without a pause for thirteen hours. Freud was the first man 
of real importance | had encountered; in my experience up 
to that time, no one else could compare with him. There 
was nothing the least trivial in his attitude. | found him 
extremely intelligent, shrewd, and altogether remarkable. 
And yet my first impressions of him remained somewhat 
tangled; | could not make him out. 

What he said about his sexual theory impressed me. 
Nevertheless his words could not remove my hesitations 
and doubts. | tried to advance these reservations of mine on 
several occasions, but each time he would attribute them to 
my lack of experience. Freud was right; in those days ! had 
not enough experience to support my objections. . . . 

Above all, Freud's attitude toward the spirit seemed to 
me highly questionable. Wherever, in a person or in a work 
of art, an expression of spirituality came to light, he 


CARL TUNG 


WouNDED HEALER OF THE SOUL 


Sun and Moon Battle 


Manuscript illumination 
from Aurora consurgens, 
late fifteenth century. 


The relationship between 
Freud and Jung was a 
meeting of opposites — 
complementary at first, 
becoming antagonistic in 
time. 


Part Onr: WorrNDED 


suspected it and insinuated that it was repressed sexuality. 
Anything that could not be directly interpreted as sexuality 
he referred to as “psychosexuality.” | protested. . . . Culture 
would then appear as a mere farce, the morbid conse- 
quence of repressed sexuality. “Yes,” he assented, “so it is, 
and that is just a curse of fate against which we are power- 
less to contend.” | was by no means disposed to agree, or to 
let it go at that, but still | did not feel competent to argue it 
out with him.?? 


Freud came to regard Jung as his son and heir. For Jung, Freud 
was a father figure, though only for a time. Nineteen years sepa- 
rated the two — and, increasingly, a clash of ideas. 

Mostly they met by letter. Their voluminous correspondence 
over seven years was an intimate discussion of scientific ideas, 
patients, colleagues, the struggles of the psychiatric movement, 
their personal lives, and their own relationship. It was a correspon- 
dence Jung didn’t want published until thirty years after his death. 
At eighty-three he called it “an unfortunately inexpungeable 


TUNG AND FREUD 29 


reminder of the incredible folly that filled the days of my youth."In 
it is revealed many aspects of his personality and growth at a time 
when few other letters have been preserved. 

Jung, at an early stage, confided to Freud that a traumatic boy- 
hood experience with a close family friend, a middle-aged man, 
was influencing emotional overtones of his relationship to him.9? 


Your last two letters contain references to my laziness in 
writing. . . . Actually — and I confess this to you with a strug- 
gle...my veneration for you has something of the charac- 
ter of a religious" crush. Though it does not really bother 
me, | still feel it is disgusting and ridiculous because of its 
undeniable erotic undertone. This abominable feeling 
comes from the fact that as a boy | was the victim of a sex- 
ual assault by a man I once worshipped. . . . 

This feeling, which | still have not got rid of, hampers me 
considerably.?4 


Dear Professor Freud, 


Heartiest thanks for your letter, which worked wonders for 
me. You are absolutely right to extol humor as the only 
decent reaction to the inevitable. This was also my principle 
until the repressed material got the better of me, luckily 
only at odd moments.?? 


Intellectual stimulus, excitement of discovery, mutual enjoy- 
ment — nothing was held back. Jung's high temper could be seen 
when he sided with Freud on a dressing-down delivered by the lat- 
ter to a vitriolic critic of psychoanalysis. 


Dear Professor Freud, 


The adventure with ^Schóttlander" is marvellous; of course 
the slimy bastard was lying. | hope you roasted, flayed, and 
impaled the fellow with such genial ferocity that he got a 
lasting taste for once of the effectiveness of psychoanalysis. 
| subscribe to your final judgment with all my heart. Such is 
the nature of these beasts. Since | could read the filth in him 
from his face | would have gone for his throat. | hope to 
God you told him all the truths so plainly that even his hen's 
brain could absorb them. ... Had I been in your shoes | 
would have softened up his guttersnipe complex with a 
sound Swiss thrashing.?6 


30  CanLTUNC 


WouNDED HEALER OF THE SOU 


lung, in a photograph 
taken about the time he 
began his seven-year 
correspondence with the 
founder of the psycho- 
analytic movement, 
Sigmund Freud. 


'ART ONE: WOUNDED 


In late 1908 the imminent birth of Jung's only son, Franz, 
brought a charming series of family vignettes beginning with a 
solicitous enquiry from Freud. 


Dear friend, 

No, the dawn is not yet. We must carefully tend our little 
lamp, for the night will be long. ...In the meantime, I ven- 
ture to hope, fate has made you a father again... . Let me 
hear from you; until then I assume that the valiant mother is 
well; to her husband she must indeed be more precious 
than all her children, just as the method must be valued 
more highly than the results obtained by it.?7 


JUNG AND FREUD 


31 


32 


Dear Professor Freud, 


Heartiest thanks for your congratulatory telegram! You can 
imagine our joy. The birth went off normally, mother and 
child are doing well.59 


Contributions by my four-year-old Agathli: the evening 
before Fránzli's birth | asked her what she would say if the 
stork brought her a little brother? “Then I shall kill it,” she 
said quick as lightning with an embarrassed, sly expression, 
and would not let herself be pinned down to this theme. 
The baby was born during the night. Early next morning | 
carried her to my wife’s bedside; she was tense and gazed in 
alarm at the rather wan-looking mother, without showing 
any joy; found nothing to say about the situation. The same 
morning, when Mama was alone, the little one suddenly ran 
to her, flung her arms round her neck and asked anxiously: 
“But, Mama, you don't have to die, do you. . . ?” 

Finally, on my advice, my wife enlightened A.... 
(Children grow in the mother like flowers on plants.) Next 
day | was in bed with influenza. A. came in with a shy, rather 
startled look on her face, wouldn't approach the bed but 
asked: "Have you a plant in your tummy too?" Ran off 
merry and carefree when this possibility was ruled out.?? 


What an enchantment such a child is! Only recently A. 
praised the beauty of her little brother to her grandmother: 
“And look what a pretty little boy's bottom he has."4? 


My Agathli continues merrily with her discoveries. New and 
delightful attempts at explanation have resulted. The act of 
birth is now fully understood, as the little one announced in 
an amusing game. She stuck her doll between her legs 
under her skirt so that only the head was showing, and 
cried: "Look, a baby is coming!" Then, pulling it out slowly: 
“And now it's all out." Only the role of the father is still 
obscure and a subject for dreams.*! 


We simply listen and meddle as little as possible. A great 
outcry this morning: Mama must come — | want to go into 
your room — What is Papa doing? — But Mama won't have 
her in the room. . . . Later, when we had got up, Agathli hops 
in, jumps into my bed, lies flat on her stomach, flails and 
kicks out with her legs like a horse — “Is that what Papa 


CARL JUNG 


WOUNDED HEALER OF THE SOUL 


Adam and Little Eve 


Painting by Paul Klee, 
1921 

Ihe facts of life, ds 
discovered by four-year- 
old Agathli, were passed 


on by her father to Freud 


Part ONE: WOUNDED 


3 HESS US . 
! M it | <> 
teh DNL ie DTI CITIES 


does? That's what Papa does, 
isn't it?”... My colleagues are 
encouraging me to write the 
thing up for the Jahrbruch.*?? 


Freud was the more demanding 
correspondent of the two, sending off 
an anxious telegram if an expected 
letter was delayed. In 1909 Jung, 
"under a terrific strain," excused a 
tardy reply, confiding several prob- 
lems, especially one involving involv- 
ing an ex-patient, Sabina Spielrein. 


The last and worst straw is 
that a complex is playing Old 
Harry with me: a woman 
patient, whom years ago | 
pulled out of a very sticky 
neurosis with unstinting ef- 
fort, has violated my confi- 
dence and my friendship in 
the most mortifying way 
imaginable. She has kicked up 
a vile scandal solely because I 
denied myself the pleasure of 
giving her a child. | have 
always acted the gentleman 
towards her, but before the 
bar of my rather too sensitive conscience | nevertheless 
don't feel clean, and that is what hurts the most because my 
intentions were always honorable. But you know how it is 
— the devil can use even the best of things for the fabrica- 
tion of filth. Meanwhile | have learnt an unspeakable 
amount of marital wisdom, for until now | had a totally 
inadequate idea of my polygamous components despite all 
self-analysis. Now | know where and how the devil can be 
laid by the heels. These painful yet extremely salutary 
insights have churned me up hellishly inside, but for that 
very reason, I hope, have secured me moral qualities which 
will be of the greatest advantage to me in later life. The rela- 
tionship with my wife has gained enormously in assurance 
and depth. 


EN A H 4 
hou: uu a 
4 ks 


JUNG AND FREUD 33 


The woman in question had been discussed between them in 
earlier years without being named, referred to only as a “hysterical 
patient” who “admits that actually her greatest wish is to have a 
child by me who would fulfill her unfillable wishes." 

It was classic transference, a projection by the patient onto the 
doctor, and in this case, too, a lurking transference by doctor onto 
patient, a difficult point in psychiatric interaction in which the doc- 
tor also surfaces little-aired aspects of his psyche. Neither had been 
fully resolved by the end of treatment, or in subsequent brinkman- 
ship relatedness between them over the following years, 


until | saw that an unintended wheel had started turning, 
whereupon I finally broke with her. She was, of course, sys- 
tematically planning my seduction, which | considered 
inopportune. Now she is seeking revenge." 


Rumor, and a letter from Spielrein, had already reached Freud, 
who advised from a longer experience of life: 


Dear friend, 


Such experiences, though painful, are necessary and hard to 
avoid. Without them we cannot really know life and what 
we are dealing with. | myself have never been taken in quite 
so badly, but | have come very close to it a number of times 
and had a narrow escape. | believe that only grim necessi- 
ties weighing on my work, and the fact that I was ten years 
older than yourself when | came to psychoanalysis, have 
saved me from similar experiences. But no lasting harm is 
done. They help us to develop the thick skin we need and to 
dominate “countertransference,” which is after all a perma- 
nent problem for us. . . . 

The way these women manage to charm us with every 
conceivable psychic perfection until they have attained 
their purpose is one of nature's greatest spectacles. Once 
that has been done or the contrary has become a certainty, 
the constellation changes amazingly. 


Sincerely yours, 
Freud^ 


Further letters from Spielrein involved Freud, bringing more 
fatherly advice: "don't go too far in the direction of contrition and 
reaction." Days later the situation peaked, drawing a full unbur- 
dening from Jung. 


34 CARL JUNG 


WOUNDED HEALER OF THE SOUL 


I have good news to report of my Spielrein affair. | took too 
black a view of things... . The day before yesterday she 
turned up at my house and had a very decent talk with me 
... She has freed herself from the transference in the best 
and nicest way and has suffered no relapse. ... Although 
not succumbing to helpless remorse, | nevertheless deplore 
the sins | have committed, for | am largely to blame for the 
high-flying hopes of my former patient. . . . | discussed with 
her the problem of the child, imagining that | was talking 
theoretically, but naturally Eros was lurking in the back- 
ground. Thus | imputed all the other wishes and hopes 
entirely to my patient without seeing the same thing in 
myself. When the situation had become so tense that the 
continued perseveration of the relationship could be 
rounded out only by sexual acts, | defended myself in a 
manner that cannot be justified morally. Caught in my delu- 
sion that | was the victim of the sexual wiles of my patient, | 
wrote to her mother that I was not the gratifier of her 
daughter's sexual desires but merely her doctor, and that 
she should free me from her. In view of the fact that the 
patient had shortly before been my friend and enjoyed my 
full confidence, my action was a piece of knavery which | 
very reluctantly confess to you as my father.49 


But the role of son was already in shift. 1909 saw the peak year 
of the Freud/Jung relationship — and its turning point. In the 
spring the two men had their third domestic meeting when Jung 
and Emma stayed with the Freuds for five days. Jung's autobio- 
graphical account of the visit records the emergence of differences 
in their attitudes to psychic phenomena on the last evening. 


It interested me to hear Freud's views on precognition and 
on parapsychology in general. When I visited him in Vienna 
in 1909 I asked him what he thought of these matters. 
Because of his materialistic prejudice, he rejected this entire 
complex of questions as nonsensical, and did so in terms of 
so shallow a positivism that | had difficulty in checking the 
sharp retort on the tip of my tongue. It was some years 
before he recognized the seriousness of parapsychology 
and acknowledged the factuality of “occult” phenomena. 
While Freud was going on this way, ! had a curious sen- 
sation. It was as if my diaphragm were made of iron and 
were becoming red-hot — a glowing vault. And at that 
moment there was such a loud report in the bookcase, 


Onz: WOUNDED JUNG AND FrEuD 3 5 


Freud, 1938 (the year 
before his death). 


Freud saw himself as a 
father figure to Jung. 
According to the Oedipus 
myth, the son must slay 
his father. To Freud, this 
described sexual jealousy; 
to Jung, the myth was a 
metaphor for the new 
growing from the old. 


which stood right next to us, that we both started up in 
alarm, fearing the thing was going to topple over on us. | 
said to Freud: “There, that is an example of a so-called cat- 
alytic exteriorization phenomenon.” 

“Oh, come,” he exclaimed. “That is sheer bosh.” 

“It is not,” | replied. “You are mistaken, Herr Professor. 
And to prove my point | now predict that in a moment there 
will be another loud report!" Sure enough, no sooner had I 
said the words than the same detonation went off in the 
bookcase. 

To this day 1 do not know what gave me this certainty. 
But I knew beyond all doubt that the report would come 
again. Freud only stared aghast at me... this incident 
aroused his mistrust of me, and I had the feeling | had done 
something against him.*7 


From Küsnacht the debate continued, Jung's statement that the 
final part of the visit "has... freed me inwardly from the oppres- 


36 CARL JUNG WOUNDED HEALER OF THE SOUL 


sive sense of your paternal authority” returning this letter from 
Freud: 


Dear friend, 


It is strange that on the very same evening when I formally 
adopted you as eldest son and anointed you . . . as my suc- 
cessor and crown prince, you should have divested me of 
my paternal dignity, which divesting seems to have given 
you as much pleasure as I, on the contrary, derived from the 
investiture of your person. Now I am afraid of falling back 
into the father role with you if I tell you how I feel about the 
poltergeist business. But | must, because my attitude is not 
what you might otherwise think. | don't deny that your 
stories and your experiment made a deep impression on 
me.... At first | was inclined to accept . . . as proof, if the 
sound that was so frequent while you were here were not 
heard again after your departure — but since then | have 
heard it repeatedly, not, however, in connection with my 
thoughts and never when | am thinking about you or this 
particular problem of yours. . . . My credulity, or at least my 
willingness to believe, vanished with the magic of your per- 
sonal presence; once again, for some inward reasons | can't 
put my finger on, it strikes me as quite unlikely that such 
phenomena should exist. . . . Accordingly, | put my fatherly 
horn-rimmed spectacles on again and warn my dear son to 
keep a cool head, for it is better not to understand some- 
thing than make such great sacrifices to understanding. . . . 

Consequently, I shall receive further news of your inves- 
tigations of the spook complex with the interest one 
accords to a charming delusion in which one does not one- 
self participate. 


Yours, Freud^? 


But psychic phenomena was not the only disagreement 
between them that last evening. 


| can still recall vividly how Freud said to me, "My dear Jung, 
promise me never to abandon the sexual theory. That is the 
most essential thing of all. You see, we must make a dogma 
of it, an unshakable bulwark.". .. In some astonishment I 
asked him, "A bulwark — against what?" To which he 
replied, "Against the black tide of mud" — and here he hes- 
itated for a moment, then added — "of occultism.”. . . It was 
the words “bulwark” and "dogma" that alarmed me . . . that 


PART ONE: WOUNDED JUNG AND FREUD 37 


no longer has anything to do with scientific judgement; only 
with a personal power drive. 

This was the thing that struck at the heart of our friend- 
ship. | knew that | would never be able to accept such an 
attitude. What Freud seemed to mean by "occultism" was 
virtually everything that philosophy and religion, including 
the rising contemporary science of parapsychology, had 
learned about the psyche.*? 


Six months later came the American trip with its honors to both 
men and the first of two fainting episodes by Freud in Jung’s pres- 
ence, prompted by anxiety about presumed "death wishes" to the 
father. The voyage dealt another blow to the relationship. 


We were together every day, and analyzed each other's 
dreams. At the time I had a number of important ones, but 
Freud could make nothing of them. | did not regard that as 
any reflection upon him, for it sometimes happens to the 
best analyst that he is unable to unlock the riddle of a 
dream. It was a human failure, and | would never have want- 
ed to discontinue our dream analyses on that account. On 
the contrary, they meant a great deal to me, and | found our 
relationship exceedingly valuable. | regarded Freud as 
an older, more mature and experienced personality, and 
felt like a son in that respect. But then something hap- 
pened which proved to be a severe blow to the whole 
relationship. 

Freud had a dream — | would not think it right to air the 
problem it involved. | interpreted it as best | could, but 
added that a great deal more could be said about it if he 
would supply me with some additional details from his pri- 
vate life. Freud's response to these words was a curious look 
— a look of the utmost suspicion. Then he said, “But | can- 
not risk my authority!" At that moment he lost it altogether. 
That sentence burned itself into my memory; and in it the 
end of our relationship was already foreshadowed. Freud 
was placing personal authority above truth.>° 


Two streams were now operating in Jung. Inwardly, a number 
of puzzling symbolic dreams were taking him deeper into the psy- 
che, past the personal to what he later called the collective level of 
the unconscious. The result was a plunge into new studies — 
mythology, archaeology, the Christian Gnostics, primitive cultures, 
astrology — and the beginnings of what was to be a fateful book, 
setting out thinking divergent from that of Freud. 


38 CARL JUNG WOUNDED HEALER OF THE SOUL 


Painting of Emma Jung, 
printed in a local Swiss 
newspaper. 


Mrs. Jung sought to 
diffuse the growing 
antipathies between her 
husband and his mentor 
by writing to Freud. 


Part ONE: WOUNDED 


Concurrently the successful professional man 
now acquired more honors, with Freud's approval, 
when the International Psychoanalytic Association 
was founded with Jung as president and editor of 
its scientific journal. An honorary doctorate fol- 
lowed a series of lectures in New York, and Part 
One of Transformations and Symbols of the Libido was 
published. 

It was Emma Jung who signalled the under- 
tones of the Freud /Jung relationship after a four- 
day visit by Freud to the Jung family home. 
Unknown to her husband she wrote to Freud. 


Dear Professor Freud, 


I don't really know how | am summoning the 
courage to write you this letter. . . . 

Since your visit | have been tormented by 
the idea that your relation with my husband is 
not altogether as it should be, and since it def- 
initely ought not to be like this | want to try to 
do whatever is in my power. | do not know 
whether | am deceiving myself when I think 
you are somehow not quite in agreement 
with Transformations of Libido. You didn't speak of it at all 
and yet I think it would do you both so much good if you 
got down to a thorough discussion of it. Or is it something 
else? If so, please tell me what, dear Herr Professor; for | 
cannot bear to see you so resigned and I even believe that 
your resignation relates not only to your real children... 
but also to your spiritual sons; otherwise you would have so 
little need to be resigned.?' 


Dear Professor Freud, 


You may imagine how overjoyed and honored | am by the 
confidence you have in Carl, but it almost seems to me as 
though you were sometimes giving too much — do you not 
see in him the follower and fulfiller more than you need? 
Doesn't one often give much because one wants to keep 
much? 

Why are you thinking of giving up already instead of 
enjoying your well-earned fame and success. . . ? 

No, you should rejoice and drink to the full the happi- 
ness of victory after having struggled for so long. And do not 
think of Carl with a father’s feeling: “He will grow, but | must 


JUNG AND FREUD 39 


dwindle,” but rather as one human being thinks of another, 
who like you has his own law to fulfill. 


Don't be angry with me. 
With warm love and veneration, Emma Jung ?? 


The final letter in that series throws light on the dynamics of 


the Jung marital relationship, which had its own difficulties. 


My Dear Professor Freud, 


Heartfelt thanks for your letter. Please don't worry, | am not 
always as despondent as I was in my last letter. . . . Usually | 
am quite at one with my fate and see very well how lucky ! 
am, but from time to time | am tormented by the conflict 
about how I can hold my own against Carl. | find | have no 
friends, all the people who associate with us really only 
want to see Carl, except for a few boring and to me quite 
uninteresting persons. 

Naturally the women are all in love with him, and with 
the men | am instantly cordoned off as the wife of the father 
or friend. Yet | have a strong need for people and Carl too 
says I should stop concentrating on him and the children, 
but what on earth am | to do? What with my strong tenden- 
cy to autoerotism it is very difficult... because | can never 
compete with Carl. In order to emphasize this | usually have 
to talk extra stupidly when in company. .. . 

You will now understand why | felt so bad at the thought 
that | had lost your favor, and | was also afraid Carl might 
notice something. At any rate he now knows about the 
exchange of letters, as he was astonished to see one of your 
letters addressed to me; but I have revealed only a little of 
their content.5? 


A life-changing decision was looming for Jung. What was he to 
do with his research into Part Two of his Transformations book? His 
understanding of it revealed facets of the libido concept and incest 


taboos that diverged completely from Freud. 


40 


Their correspondence records a mounting crisis. 
Dear Professor Freud, 


On the question of incest, | am grieved to see what power- 
ful affects you have mobilized for your counter-offensive 


CARL JUNG 


WOUNDED HEALER OF THE SOUL 


PART ONE: WOUNDED 


against my suggestions. Since 1 think | have objective rea- 
sons on my side, | am forced to stand by my interpretation 
of the incest concept, and see no way out of the dilemma. It 
is not for frivolous reasons or from regressive prejudices 
that | have been led to this formulation, as will, | hope, 
become clear to you when you read my painstaking and 
intricate examination of the whole problem in my second 
part. . . . I set out with the idea of corroborating the old view 
of incest, but was obliged to see that things are different 
from what | expected. . . . 

I hope we shall be able to come to an understanding on 
controversial points later on. It seems I shall have to go my 
own way for some time to come. But you know how obsti- 
nate we Swiss are. 


With kind regards, Jung?^ 


Dear friend, 


About the libido question, we shall see. The nature of the 
change you have made is not quite clear to me and | know 
nothing of its motivation. Once | am better informed, I shall 
surely be able to switch to objectivity, precisely because | 
am well aware of my bias. Even if we cannot come to terms 
immediately, there is no reason to suppose that this scien- 
tific difference will detract from our personal relations. | can 
recall that there were profounder differences between us 
at the beginning of our relationship. 


Yours, Freud?? 


Dear Professor Freud, 


With me it is not a question of caprice but of fighting for 
what I hold to be true. In this matter no personal regard for 
you can restrain me. . . . Obviously | would prefer to be on 
personal terms with you, to whom | owe so much, but I 
want your objective judgment and no feelings of resent- 
ment. | think | deserve this much if only for reasons of expe- 
diency: | have done more to promote the psychoanalytic 
movement than Rank, Stekel, Adler, etc. put together. | can 
only assure you that there is no resistance on my side, unless 
it be my refusal to be treated like a fool riddled with 
complexes. 


Most sincerely, Jung°® 


JUNG AND FREUD 


41 


42 


Dear Dr. Jung, 

| am gradually coming to terms with this [libido] paper... 
and | now believe that in it you have brought us a great rev- 
elation, though not the one you intended. You seem to have 
solved the riddle of all mysticism, showing it to be based on 
the symbolic utilization of complexes that have outlived 
their function. 


With regards to you and your wife, 
Your untransformed Freud ?7 


Dear Professor Freud, 

As evidence that you — if | may be permitted so disre- 
spectful an expression — underestimate my work by a very 
wide margin, | would cite your remark that “without intend- 
ing it, | have solved the riddle of all mysticism, showing it to 
be based on the symbolic utilization of complexes that have 
outlived their function." 

My dear Professor, forgive me again, but this sentence 
shows me that you deprive yourself of the possibility of 
understanding my work by your underestimation of it. You 
speak of this insight as though it were some kind of pinna- 
cle, whereas actually it is at the very bottom of the moun- 
tain. This insight has been self-evident to us for years. Again, 
please excuse my frankness. It is only occasionally that | am 
afflicted with the purely human desire to be understood 
intellectually and not be measured by the yardstick of 
neurosis. 


With kind regards, 
Jung?’ 


Dear Dr. Jung, 
The habit of taking objective statements personally is not 
only a (regressive) human trait, but also a very specific Vien- 
nese failing. I shall be very glad if such claims are not made 
on you. But are you “objective” enough to consider [your] 
following slip without anger? 

“Even Adler’s cronies do not regard me as one of yours.” 


Yours nevertheless, Freud”? 
Dear Professor Freud, 


May I say a few words to you in earnest? . . . your technique 
of treating your pupils like patients is a blunder. . . . You go 


CARL JUNG 


WOUNDED HEALER OF THE Sout. 


Isis and Osiris 


Vignette from the Papyrus of Ani/The Egyptian 
Book of the Dead, Egypt, c. 1500 B.C.E. 


Isis and Osiris, the archetypal loving couple, 
were brother and sister as well as husband 
and wife. Osiris (Will) was dismembered by 
his brother Seth (Darkness). Isis (Wisdom) 
gathered the scattered pieces of his body and 
returned him to life. Egyptian rulers were 
encouraged to wed siblings in emulation 

of the gods. 

Freud and Jung disputed the questions of 
incest and mysticism; this was the source of 
their ultimate break. 


^ 


MEUA HI HEUTE io 


d 


around sniffing out all the symptomatic actions in your 
vicinity, thus reducing everyone to the level of sons and 
daughters who blushingly admit the existence of their 
faults. Meanwhile you remain on top as the father, sitting 
pretty. ... 

You see, my dear Professor, so long as you hand out this 
stuff 1 don't give a damn for my symptomatic actions; they 
shrink to nothing in comparison with the formidable beam 
in my brother Freud's eye. | am not in the least neurotic — 
touch wood! | have submitted . . . to analysis and am much 


"ART ONE: WOUNDED JUNG AND FREUD 


the better for it. You know, of course, how far a patient gets 
with self-analysis: not out of his neurosis — just like you. If 
ever you should rid yourself entirely of your complexes and 
stop playing the father to your sons and instead of aiming 
continually at their weak spots take a good look at your own 
for a change, then I will mend my ways and at one stroke 
uproot the vice of being in two minds about you. .. . 

No doubt you will be outraged by this peculiar token of 
friendship, but it may do you good all the same. 


With best regards, 
Most sincerely yours, Jung.©° 


3.1.1913 
Dear Mr. President, 
Dear Doctor, 
Your allegation that | treat my followers like patients is 
demonstrably untrue. In Vienna | am reproached for the 
exact opposite. ... 
Otherwise your letter cannot be answered. It creates a 
situation that would be difficult to deal with in a personal 
talk and totally impossible in correspondence. It is a con- 
vention among us analysts that none of us need feel 
ashamed of his own bit of neurosis. But one who while 
behaving abnormally keeps shouting that he is normal gives 
ground for the suspicion that he lacks insight into his illness. 
Accordingly, | propose that we abandon our personal rela- 
tions entirely. 


Photograph by Petér Angelo 
Simon, 1997. 

By 1913, Jung and Freud 
had stopped speaking to 
each other. 


44 CARL JUNG WOUNDED HEALER OF THE SOUL 


Part ONE: WOUNDED 


Descent 


After the break with Freud, all my friends and acquaintances 
dropped away. My book was declared to be rubbish; I was a 
mystic, and that settled the matter. Riklin and Maeder alone 
stuck by me. But I had foreseen my isolation and harbored 
no illusion about the reactions of my so-called friends. 
| realized that the chapter “The Sacrifice" meant my own 
sacrifice.9? 


I n more ways than one, Jung said he lived most of his adult life 
until nearly forty on personality No. 1 — ambition, career, success, 
family, international repute. Now only family and private practice 
remained. He resigned his public posts including those with the 
Psychoanalytic Society. His old intellectual life drew to a standstill 
as he found himself incapable of reading a scientific book. For the 
next six years his inner personality asserted itself in earnest, draw- 
ing him deeper and deeper into the unconscious of his own psyche. 


After the parting of the ways with Freud, a period of inner 
uncertainty began for me. It would be no exaggeration to 
call it a state of disorientation. | felt totally suspended in 
mid-air, for | had not yet found my own footing. ... 

| lived as if under constant inner pressure. At times this 
became so strong that | suspected there was some psychic 
disturbance in myself. . . . Retrospection led to nothing but 
a fresh acknowledgment of my own ignorance. . . . | said to 
myself, "Since | know nothing at all, I shall simply do what- 
ever occurs to me. .. .” 

The first thing that came to the surface was a childhood 
memory from perhaps my tenth or eleventh year. At that 
time I had had a spell of playing passionately with building 
blocks. | distinctly recalled how | had built little houses and 
castles. . . . To my astonishment, this memory was accompa- 
nied by a good deal of emotion. "Aha," I said to myself, 
"there is still life in these things. The small boy is still around, 
and possesses a creative life which I lack. But how can | 
make my way to it?”... | had no choice but to return to it 
and take up once more that child's life with his childish 
games. This moment was a turning point in my fate, but | 
gave in only after endless resistances and with a sense of 
resignation. For it was a painfully humiliating experience to 


DESCENT 45 


Photograph by Peter Angelo 
Simon, 1997. 


“After the parting of the 
ways with Freud a period 
of inner uncertainty began 
for me. It would be no 
exaggeration to call ita 
state of disorientation. | 
felt totally suspended in 
mid-air, for | had not yet 
found my own footing. . . ^ 


realize there was nothing to be done except play childish 
games. 

Nevertheless | began accumulating suitable stones. . . . 
And I started building: cottages, a castle, a whole village . . . 
the church .. . an altar... every day... as soon as I was 
through eating, | began playing, and continued to do so 
until the patients arrived. ... It released a stream of fan- 
tasies which I later carefully wrote down.9? 


46 CARL JUNG WOUNDED HEALER OF THE SOUL 


- WOUNDED 


What Jung called his confrontation with the unconscious has 
been known to humanity from spiritual history through the aeons. 
It’s in the Gnostic texts of early Christianity, the dark night of the 
soul of St. John of the Cross, the shamanic trials of primal cultures, 
the Nekyia episode of Homer’s Odyssey, the night sea journey 
recorded in many mythologies. It is personal and collective, an ini- 
tiation of death and rebirth, only undertaken by the few and always 
perilous. 

For Jung his inner experience and the life of his time coincided. 
Descent also brought repeated visions of European catastrophe in 
rivers of blood, and a warning — the year 1913. 

An inner voice told him: 


"Look at it well; it is wholly real and it will be so. You cannot 
doubt it." 


| drew the conclusion that they had to do with me myself, 
and decided that | was menaced by a psychosis.The idea of 
war did not occur to me at all.9 


An incessant stream of fantasies had been released. . . . | felt 
as if gigantic blocks of stone were tumbling down upon me. 
One thunderstorm followed another. ... When | endured 
these assaults of the unconscious | had an unswerving con- 
viction that | was obeying a higher will. . . . | knew that I had 
to let myself plummet down into them. ... 1 felt not only 
violent resistance to this, but a distinct fear. For | was afraid 
of losing command of myself and becoming a prey to the 
fantasies — and as a psychiatrist | realized only too well 
what that meant. . . . 

| resolved upon the decisive step. | was sitting at my 
desk once more, thinking over my fears. Then I let myself 
drop. Suddenly it was as though the ground literally gave 
way beneath my feet, and | plunged down into dark depths. 
| could not fend off a feeling of panic.© 


Visions, dreams, and inner voices pounded his consciousness 
along with a sense of their meaning. 


a dark cave . . . a dwarf with a leathery skin . . . glowing red 
crystal . . . running water... a corpse floated by. . . a gigan- 
tic black scarab . . . a red, newborn sun... blood. A thick jet 
of it. 


DESCENT 47 


Shadow Cornered 
Painting by C. G. Jung. 
jung depicted his sense 
of despair and isolation 
in a painting from his 
unpublished Red Book. 


| was stunned by this vision...a drama of death and 
renewal. Six days later, | had the following dream. 


I... with an unknown brownskinned man... in a lonely, 
rocky mountain landscape . . . Siegfried’s horn . . . we had to 
kill him . . . Siegfried . . . on a chariot made of the bones of 
the dead .. . at furious speed... we shot at him... struck 


48 CARL JUNG WOUNDED HEALER OF THE Sot 


dead ...a tremendous downfall of rain...an unbearable 
feeling of guilt. . . . 


| tried ...to fall asleep again, but a voice within me said, 
“You must understand the dream, and must do so at once! 
... If you do not understand the dream, you must shoot 
yourself!" 


Suddenly the meaning of the dream dawned on me...a 
sign of my secret identity with Siegfried, as well as of the 
grief a man feels when he is forced to sacrifice his ideal and 
his conscious attitudes . . . for there are higher things than 
the ego's will, and to these one must bow. 


In order to seize hold of the fantasies, | frequently imagined 
a steep descent...a crater... | had the feeling that | was in 
the land of the dead. . . . I caught sight of two figures, an old 
man with a white beard and a beautiful young girl... . She 
was blind. . . . What a strange couple: Salome and Elijah. But Elijah 
assured me that he and Salome had belonged together from all 
eternity. . . . They had a black serpent living with them which 
displayed an unmistakable fondness for me. 


In myths the snake is a frequent counterpart of the hero. . . . 
Elijah is the wise old prophet... the factor of intelligence 
and knowledge; Salome, the erotic element . . . an anima fig- 
ure... blind because she does not see the meaning of 
things.56 


To hold any kind of balance between inner and outer self was a 
struggle. 


| needed a point of support in “this world.". .. The uncon- 
scious contents could have driven me out of my wits. But my 
family and the knowledge: | have a medical diploma from a 
Swiss university, | must help my patients, I have a wife and 
five children, 1 live at 228 Seestrasse in Küsnacht — these 
were actualities which made demands upon me... . 

My family and my profession always remained a joyful 
reality and a guarantee that I also had a normal existence.97 


PART ONE: WOUNDED DESCENT 49 


CARL JUNG WOUNDED HEALER OF THE SOUL 


OPPOSITE 


Photograph of Toni Wolff, 
December 1930. 


Patient, student, poet, 
muse, love, friend, and 
colleague, Toni worked 
with Jung for most of 
her life. 


Part ONE: WOUNDED 


Tani 


A “point of support” not mentioned in Memories, Dreams, Reflec- 
tions as published was Toni Wolff, a former patient, lyric poet, and 
later therapist whom Jung described to Freud in 1911 as 


a new discovery... a remarkable intellect with an excellent 
feeling for religion and philosophv.® 


Thirteen years younger than Jung, it was she who initiated a 
personal relationship with him, introduced him to Eastern spiritu- 
ality, helped free his intuition from the bonds of his intellect, and 
brought him back to everyday reality if he was losing himself. It 
could be said that Toni Wolff was the reflection of Jung’s feminine 
and undiscovered self, the bridge and guiding force of his period of 
CTISIS i 
Either she did not love me and was indifferent concerning 
my fate, or she loved me — as she certainly did — and then 
it was nothing short of heroism. Such things stand forever, 
and | shall be grateful to her in all eternitv.9? 


Emma Jung is reported to have said near the end of her life. 


| shall always be grateful to Toni for doing for my husband 


what I or anyone could not have done for him at a most crit- 
ical time 70 


Their relationship, personal and professional, was to run paral- 
lel to Jung's marriage for forty years. It was lived openly, though 
often with painful difficulties in the early stages for both women, 
until an acceptable way of living was found. It was in later years 
that Emma confided to a friend 


You see, he never took anything from me to give to Toni, 


dut the more he gave her the more he seemed able to give 
ne 71 


Breakthrough 


But in Jung’s midlife struggle for himself there was not much to 
give out to his family. It was he himself who still needed all the 
support he could find. Insomnia and stomach trouble accompanied 
the intense suffering of this period. The fear of losing his hold 
remained as new fantasy figures rose out of his unconscious mind 
in dreams. Only now they didn’t seem to personify aspects of his 
personal life. 


a blue sky, like the sea, covered... by flat brown clods of 
earth... breaking apart .. . suddenly... a winged being 
sailing across the sky. . . an old man with the horns of a bull. 
He held a bunch of four keys, one . . . clutched as if he were 
about to open a lock. He had the wings of a kingfisher with 
its characteristic colors. 


Neo-Babylonian seal of 
winged hero, c. 800 B.C.E 
Jung's vision-figure 
Philemon was a winged 
spirit based on the 
ancient archetype of 
the wise counselor. 


52 CARL JUNG WOUNDED HEALER OF THE SOUL 


The Deceased Standing 
Before a Ka on a Pedestal 
From the Papyrus of Nu, 
Egypt. 

The hieroglyphic 

sign of ka (right, — 
from a plate of 

rolled papyrus) was the 
ancient Egyptian designa- 
tion for the generating 
and sustaining vital forces, 
especially of men, and 
was later extended to 
denote the spiritual life- 
force in general. The ka- 
gesture, made by raising 
the open hands with 


palms facing outward, Philemon was a pagan and brought with him an Egypto- 
served to protect one, Hellenic atmosphere with a Gnostic coloration.7? 

and the hieroglyph for 

ka had the same effect. While painting this dream image Jung was "thunderstruck" to 


find, in his garden, a newly dead kingfisher with no signs of exter- 
nal injuries, a rare experience in Zürich. It was the kind of mean- 
ingful coincidence he was to call “synchronicity.” 


Philemon and other figures of my fantasies brought home to 
me the crucial insight that there are things in the psyche 
which I do not produce, but which produce themselves and 
have their own life. Philemon represented a force which 
was not myself. . . .It was he who taught me psychic objec- 
tivity, the reality of the psyche. . . .| understood that there is 
something in me which can say things that | do not know 
and do not intend. ... 

Psychologically, Philemon represented superior insight. 
.. To me he was what the Indians call a guru. . . . 

And the fact was that he conveyed to me many an illu- 
minating idea.7? 


A final fantasy was a figure from deep out of the earth whom 
Jung called Ka. In ancient Egypt it was the name given to the king's 
earthly form, his "embodied soul." 


I did a painting of him, showing him in his earth-bound 
form, as a herm with base of stone and upper part of 
bronze. . . . Ka's expression has something demonic about 
it. . . .He is saying, “I am he who buries the gods in gold and 
gems." 


PART ONE: WOUNDED BREAKTHROUGH 53 


Philemon had a lame foot, but was a winged spirit, 
whereas Ka represented a kind of earth demon... . Phile- 
mon was the spiritual aspect, or “meaning.” Ka... was a 
spirit of nature. ... Ka was he who made everything real, 
but who also obscured the halcyon spirit, Meaning, or 
replaced it by beauty. ... 

In time | was able to integrate both figures through the 
study of alchemy.”4 


From the safe distance in time of his autobiography, Jung could 


conclude 


It is of course ironical that I, a psychiatrist, should at almost 
every step of my experiment have run into the same psychic 
material which is the stuff of psychosis and is found in the 
insane. This is the fund of unconscious images which fatally 
confuse the mental patient. But it is also the matrix of a 
mythopoeic imagination which has vanished from our ratio- 
nal age. Though such imagination is present everywhere, it 
is both tabooed and dreaded.”> 


In 1916, while a rational age reaped half a million deaths in war, 
a very gradual inner change began for Jung. This prelude to emer- 
gence urged creative form to what might have been taught by 
Philemon. The lead-up to the book Seven Sermons to the Dead 
involved the whole Jung household in what seemed to be a haunt- 


ing by ghostly entities. 


54 


Around five o’clock in the afternoon on Sunday the front 
doorbell began ringing frantically. It was a bright summer 
day; the two maids were in the kitchen, from which the 
open square outside the front door could be seen. Everyone 
immediately looked to see who was there, but there was no 
one in sight. | was sitting near the doorbell, and not only 
heard it but saw it moving. We all simply stared at one 
another. The atmosphere was thick, believe me! Then | 
knew that something had to happen. The whole house was 
filled as if there were a crowd present, crammed full of spir- 
its. They were packed deep right up to the door, and the air 
was so thick it was scarcely possible to breathe. As for 
myself, | was all a-quiver with the question: “For God's sake, 
what in the world is this?” Then they cried out in chorus, 
“We have come back from Jerusalem where we found 
not what we sought.” That is the beginning of the Seven 
Sermons. 


CARL JUNG 


WOUNDED HEALER OF THR Sorn 


Abraxas 


Design from a Gnostic gem, 
second century. 


Jung wore a Gnostic 
signet ring. Abraxas is the 
Gnostic deity whose 
name, in the Greek 
Kabbalah, equates to 365 
— the number of days in 
the year. Hence he is a 
solar deity. His rooster's 
head confirms this attri- 
bution. Abraxas combines 
good and evil in a unity. 
The serpents that form his 
legs imply a creative, 
sexual aspect. 


Part ONE: WOUNDED 


Then it began to flow out of me, and in the course of 
three evenings the thing was written. As soon as I took up 
the pen, the whole ghostly assemblage evaporated. . . . The 
haunting was over. . . . 

These conversations with the dead formed a kind of 
prelude to what | had to communicate to the world about 
the unconscious: a kind of pattern of order and interpreta- 
tion of its general contents./6 


The book is a kind of poem written in archaic style. Seven 
Sermons to the Dead was originally published anonymously in 
limited edition and is not included, by his own request, in the 
official twenty volumes of Jung's Collected Works. Yet it outlines the 
skeleton of his most essential ideas, including the conflict of oppo- 

sites and the concept of individuation. 


There is a god whom ye know not, for mankind forgot 
it. We name it by its name Abraxas. It is more indefinite 
still than god and devil. . . .It is improbable probability, 

unreal reality. Had the pleroma a being, Abraxas would 
be its manifestation. . . . 
It is also creatura, because it is distinct from the 
pleroma. ... 
The power of Abraxas is twofold; but ye see it not, 
because for your eyes the warring opposites of this 
power are extinguished. 
What the god-sun speaketh is life. 
What the devil speaketh is death. 
But Abraxas speaketh that hallowed and accursed word 
which is life and death at the same time. 

Abraxas begetteth truth and lying, good and evil, light 
and darkness, in the same word and in the same act. Where- 
fore is Abraxas terrible. . . . 

It is abundance that seeketh union with emptiness. 

It is holy begetting. 

It is love and love’s murder. 

It is the saint and his betrayer. 

It is the brightest light of day and darkest night of 
madness. ... 

It is the mightiest creature, and in it the creature is afraid 
of itself. 

It is the manifest opposition of creatura to the pleroma 
and its nothingness. . . . 

It is the life of creatura. 

It is the operation of distinctiveness. 


BREAKTHROUGH 55 


It is the love of man.... 
It is the appearance and the shadow of man. 
It is illusory reality." 


If Jung's sense of isolation began with the experience of 
childhood dreams it reached its peak in the years of inner images. 
He'd been compelled to go through an unconscious process, not 
knowing what it meant or where it led. The gulf between inner and 
outer worlds seemed irreconcilable, their interaction not yet seen. 

Dim understanding began in the last two years of the war while 
he was stationed as Medical Corps Doctor and Commander of a 
British internment camp in Switzerland. Every morning he 
sketched in a notebook a circular drawing which seemed to corre- 
spond to his inner situation at the time. He called them mandalas, 
the Sanskrit word for circle. Mandalas show a diversity of patterns 
radiating from a central point. Jung discovered them to be univer- 
sal symbols of the energy of the human form. 


With the help of these drawings | could observe my psychic 
transformations from day to day. ... My mandalas were 
cryptograms concerning the state of the self....In them | 
saw the self — that is, my whole being — actively at work. 
To be sure, at first | could only dimly understand them, but 
they seemed to me highly significant, and 1 guarded them 
like precious pearls. ! had the distinct feeling that they were 
something central. . . . 

Only gradually did | discover what the mandala really 
is: "Formation, Transformation, Eternal Mind's eternal 
recreation” and that is the self, the wholeness of the 
personality. . . . 

The self, | thought, was like the monad which I am, and 
which is my world. The mandala represents this monad, and 
corresponds to the microcosmic nature of the psyche.”8 


Jung's entire inner journey is recorded by him in what is called 
the Red Book, written in calligraphic script and illustrated with 
numerous paintings of what he experienced. The Red Book is held 
by the Jung family and, by Jung’s own request, has never been pub- 
lished in full. 


The years when | was pursuing my inner images were the 
most important in my life — in them everything essential 
was decided. . .. 

It was then that | ceased to belong to myself alone, 
ceased to have the right to do so. From then on, my life 


56 CARLJUNG 


Wounnen Har ER ne THR Sar 


Systema munditotious 
Painting by C. G. Jung, 
1916. 

Jung’s first mandala 
pictures the self complete 
and in relationship to the 
universe. 


belonged to the generality. The knowledge I was concerned 
with, or was seeking, still could not be found in the science 
of those days. | myself had to undergo the original experi- 
ence, and, moreover, try to plant the results of my experi- 
ence in the soil of reality. . . . It was then that | dedicated 
myself to service of the psyche. I loved and hated it, but it 
was my greatest wealth. My delivering of myself over to it 
... was the only way by which | could endure my existence 
and live it as fully as possible. . . . 

It has taken me virtually forty-five years to distill within 
the vessel of my scientific work the things | experienced and 
wrote down at that time. . . . That was the primal stuff which 
compelled me to work upon it. . . .1t was the prima materia 
for a lifetime’s work.”? 


Part ONE: WOUNDED BREAKTHROUGH 57 


Part Two 
HEALER 


79 TA w^ 


wd 


NN 
AN 


i 
A41 


| have an old soul. At high school at fifteen, my schoolmates called me the Patriarch 
Abraham. That's very important, an old soul. We always retain traces of an existence 
which is not earthly, a state of abundance where we know everything.! 


CARL JUNG WOUNDED HEALER OF THE SOU 


OVERLEAF 
Bow to Creativity 


Painting by C. G. Jung, 
from the Red Book. 


OPPOSITE 
Jung in his eighties. 


BELOW 


Detail from Creation of 
Adam 


Fresco by Michelangelo 
Buonarroti, Sistine Chapel, 
Vatican, Rome, c. 
1511-1512. 


Individuation means that 
a man becomes an adult, 
knowing “that he does 
not only depend on God 
but that God also 
depends on man.” 


Prelude 


Cari Jung has been called the first New Age psychologist. His 
entire work has been described as “a psycho-religious statement, a 
progressive interpretation of the numinous by which man is con- 
sciously or unconsciously filled, surrounded and led."? 

Jung fought off all attempts to label him a “mystic.” Repeatedly 
he defined himself as “an empiricist who moved within the limits 
of a natural empirical science.” 

Central to his Analytical Psychology is the individuation 
process. It might also be called “coming to selfhood” or "self- 
realization.” 


The individual is all-important as he is the carrier of life, and 
his development and fulfillment are of paramount signifi- 
cance. It is vital for each living being to become its own ent- 
elechia and to grow into that which it was from the very 
beginning.? 


Individuation is the experience of a natural law, an inner self- 
regulating process by which man becomes a whole human being 
acknowledging and living the total range of himself. In the process 
the ego is ultimately faced with something larger than itself, a force 
that it yields to and serves. The human being thus recognizes itself 
as both material and spiritual, conscious and unconscious. 


Part Two: HEALER 


The Dream 


Painting by Frantisek Kupka, 

c. 1909. 

To individuals, becoming whole or 
complete is the process by which we 
“give birth” to ourselves as both “truly 
human" and “partially divine” within 
the Self. 


62 CARL JUNG 


WOUNDED HEALER OF THE SOUL 


Part Two: HEALER 


Individuation does not only mean that man has become 
truly human as distinct from animal, but that he is to 
become partially divine as well. That means practically that 
he becomes adult, responsible for his existence, knowing 
that he does not only depend on God but that God also 
depends on man.* 


Jung was at some pains to point out that the wholeness he 
spoke of meant completion, not perfection. Perfection he saw as a 
masculine concept, completion as a feminine one. 


To get integrated or complete is such a formidable task that 
one does not dare to set people further goals like perfec- 
tion. As for instance the ordinary physician neither imagines 
nor hopes to make of his patient an ideal athlete, so the psy- 
chological doctor does not dream of being able to produce 
saints. He is highly content if he brings forth in himself as 
well as in others a fairly balanced and more or less sound 
individual, no matter how far from the state of perfection. 
Before we strive after perfection, we ought to be able to live 
the ordinary man without self-mutilation. If anybody should 
find himself after his humble completion still left with a suf- 
ficient amount of energy, then he may begin his career as a 
saint. 


In 1921 Jung’s book Psychological Types was published, intro- 
ducing the term “introverted” and “extroverted” into everyday 
speech as basic categories of typology with four psychological 
functions — thinking, feeling, sensation, and intuition. At about the 
same time he was a speaker in the “School of Wisdom” lectures put 
on by his friend Count Herman Keyserling in Germany. Partici- 
pants were an eclectic mix of representatives from diverse fields 
including psychiatry, philosophy, and anthropology. 

Social worker Olga Freun von Kónig-Fachsenfeld was one of 
them. 


In an atmosphere that was, | might say, almost prickly with 
intellect and also a bit modish, the lectures kept offering 
new high points. But it was the statements of C. G. Jung, 
then still unknown to me, that touched me in a quite spe- 
cial way. They contrasted so thoroughly with the rational 
intellectuality of the rest — at least that was my impression. 
But, simultaneously with my admiring fascination, my young 


PRELUDE 63 


Photograph by Toni Wolff. 
Jung in “peasant” cap at 
the Swanage seminar, 
England, 1925 


sense of reality became alerted. “This is ‘superbrain’, can this 
be all right? 

When later in the course of the session | saw Jung, like a 
sturdy peasant, his hat pushed back to the scruff of his neck, 
walking out of that convivial [fashionable] society milieu in 
long strides, then | knew: “If this man says something like 
that, then it must be all right.” The earth-rootedness that | 
felt in Jung was for me the guarantee for the credibility of 
his psychology.® 


64 CARL JUNG WOUNDED HEALER OF THE SOUL 


Jung's handprint. 


This print shows both 
extraordinary physical 
strength and deep well- 
springs of imaginative 
thought. 


Part Two: HEALER 


Primal Cultures 


Jung was already making a series of expedi- 
tions into territories where no European lan- 
guage was spoken, no Christian concepts 
prevailed, and rational intellect was not a 
guiding ideal. He needed to see European cul- 
ture from the outside. A couple of visits to 
Africa produced vitalizing impressions that 
he drew on for decades. 

Dr. Henry Fierz remembered this story 
from his father, who was with Jung in Alexan- 
dria. 


When they left the boat a chiromancer 
came to them and offered to read 
their hands. . . . He read Jung's. ... 

“Oh, you are one of the very few 
great men | have seen. | can't say 
more." And he added "For great men 
and their friends there is no fee,” but he got something of 
course.” 


Jung has left some vivid accounts of the effects of his travels on 
him. 


From Tozeur I went on to the oasis of Nefta. . . . Our mounts 
were large, swift-footed mules, on which we made rapid 
progress. As we approached the oasis, a single rider, wholly 
swathed in white, came toward us. With proud bearing he 
rode by without offering us any greeting, mounted on a 
black mule whose harness was banded and studded with 
silver. He made an impressive, elegant figure. Here was a 
man who certainly possessed no pocket watch, let alone a 
wrist watch; for he was obviously and unselí-consciously 
the person he had always been. He lacked that faint note of 
foolishness which clings to the European. The European is, 
to be sure, convinced that he is no longer what he was ages 
ago; but he does not know what he has since become. His 
watch tells him that since the "Middle Ages" time and its 
synonym, progress, have crept up on him and irrevocably 
taken something from him. With lightened baggage he con- 
tinues his journey, with steadily increasing velocity, toward 


PRIMAL CULTURES 65 


66 CARL JUNG WOUNDED HEALER OF THE SOUL 


Ochwiay Biano (Mountain 
Lake), New Mexico. 


A Pueblo Chief 
befriended Jung in 1924 
and brought home to him 
the truth of thinking with 
the heart. 


OPPOSITE 
Portrait of Vollard 


Painting by Pablo Picasso, 
1910. 


Jung contrasted 

the vitality and self- 
possession of Africans 
and Native Americans he 
encountered in his travels 
with fragmented Euro- 
peans, out of contact 

with their center. 


Part Two: HEALER 


nebulous goals. He compensates for the 
loss of gravity and the corresponding 
sentiment d’incompletude by the illusion 
of his triumphs, such as steamships, rail- 
ways, aeroplanes, and rockets, that rob 
him of his duration and transport him into 
another reality of speeds and explosive 
accelerations. 

The deeper we penetrated into the 
Sahara, the more time slowed down 
for me; it even threatened to move 
backward.? 


From this he could see that Europeans had 
gained "a certain measure of will and directed 
intention" at the cost of "intensity of life." The 
rationalist too found “much that is human alien to 
him." The result was a loss of vitality and a forc- 
ing underground of primitive parts of the psyche. 
This kind of cut-off European he would describe 
as a "technological savage" and "intellectual bar- 
barian." Around him in North Africa people lived 
"so much closer to life," their lives and being cen- 
tered in emotion. 

On a trip to Taos, New Mexico, a Pueblo Indian Chief, Ochwiay 
Biano (Mountain Lake), brought the point home very directly to 


Jung. 


"See," Ochwiay Biano said, "how cruel the whites look. 
Their lips are thin, their noses sharp, their faces furrowed 
and distorted by folds. Their eyes have a staring expression; 
they are always seeking something. What are they seeking? 
The whites always want something; they are always uneasy 
and restless. We do not know what they want. We do not 
understand them. We think that they are mad." 

I asked him why he thought the whites were all mad. 

"They say that they think with their heads," he replied. 

^Why of course. What do you think with?" | asked him in 
surprise. 

^We think here," he said, indicating his heart. 

| fell into a long meditation. For the first time in my life, 
so it seemed to me, someone had drawn for me a picture of 
the real white man. . . . This Indian had struck our vulnera- 
ble spot, unveiled a truth to which we are blind. ... 


PRIMAL CULTURES 67 


What we from our point of view call 
colonization, missions to the heathen, 
spread of civilization, etc., has another face 
— the face of a bird of prey seeking with 
cruel intentness for distant quarry — a face 
worthy of a race of pirates and highway- 
men.... 

After a prolonged silence he continued, 
“The Americans want to stamp out our reli- 
gion. Why can they not let us alone? What 
we do, we do not only for ourselves but for 
the Americans also. Yes, we do it for the 
whole world. Everyone benefits by it.” 

| could observe from his excitement that 
he was alluding to some extremely impor- 
tant element of his religion. | therefore 
asked him; “You think, then, that what you 
do in your religion benefits the whole 
world?” He replied with great animation, 
“Of course. If we did not do it, what would 
become of the world?” And with a signifi- 
cant gesture he pointed to the sun.... 

“After all,” he said, “we are a people 
who live on the roof of the world; we are 
the sons of Father Sun, and with our 
religion we daily help our father to go 
across the sky.”... 

I then realized on what the “dignity,” the 
tranquil composure of the individual Indi- 
an, was founded . . . his life is cosmological- 
ly meaningful, for he helps the father and 
preserver of all life in his daily rise and 
descent. . . . Out of sheer envy we are oblig- 
ed to smile at the Indians' naiveté and to 
plume ourselves on our cleverness; for oth- 
erwise we would discover how impover- 
ished and down at the heels we are. Knowledge does not Eagle Dancer 
enrich us; it removes us more and more from the mythic Painting by Pablita Velarde, 
world in which we were once at home by right of birth.? Santa Clara Pueblo. 

The Pueblo Indian, 
Equatorial Africa captured Jung for life. What he called the through the connection 
"divine peace" of a still-primeval country stirred those elements in he maimtainswith hie 
himself, the “immemorially known,” bringing into focus a major winged protter ane iis 


MOM : : : : attendant ritual, helps 
realization on the Athi Plains, a game preserve near Nairobi. keep thé earth in balances 


a 


68 CARL JUNG WOUNDED HEALER OF THE SOUL 


On the Athi plains 

it game preserve in 
Africa, lung came to rec 
ognize a cosmic meaning 
for modern man: The 
human being 


5 


as witness 
ind participant, “is 
ndispensable for th« 


completion of creation 


Part Two: Hark 


To the very brink of the horizon we 
saw gigantic herds of animals: gazelle, 
antelope, gnu, zebra, warthog, and so 
on. Grazing, heads nodding, the herds 
moved forward like slow rivers. There 
was scarcely any sound save the 
melancholy cry of a bird of prey. This 
was the stillness of the eternal begin- 
ning, the world as it had always been, 
in the state of non-being; for until then 
no one had been present to know that 
it was this world. . . . 

There the cosmic meaning of con- 
sciousness became overwhelmingly 
clear to me... . Man, J, in an invisible 
act of creation put the stamp of per- 
fection on the world by giving it objec- 
tive existence. This act we usually 
ascribe to the Creator alone, without 
considering that in so doing we view 
life as a machine calculated down to 
the last detail, which, along with the 
human psyche, runs on senselessly, 
obeying foreknown and predeter- 
ined rules. In such a cheerless clockwork fantasy there is 
> drama of man, world, and God; there is no “new day" 
ading to "new shores," but only the dreariness of calculat- 
1 processes. My old Pueblo friend came to my mind. He 
ought that the raison d'étre of his pueblo had been to 
Ip their father, the sun, to cross the sky each day. | had 
ivied him for the fullness of meaning in that belief, and 
id been looking about without hope for a myth of our 
vn. Now I knew what it was, and knew even more: that 
an is indispensable for the completion of creation; that, in 
ct, he himself is the second creator of the world. . . 10 


MAL Cri TURES 


6 


Tower at Bollingen, which Jung 
helped build, after the second phase 
of construction. 


“In Bollingen,” he said, "I am most 
deeply myself.” 


70 CARL JUNG 


WouNDED HEALER OF THE SOUL 


Bollingen 


At home, Jung set about creating a retreat for 
himself, a second home expressing in concrete 
form his inner nature. Bollingen, at lake’s edge 
in Zurich, twenty miles and light years from 
his family home in Kiisnacht, is a medieval 
monument of tower and turrets, stone and 
silence, inviting the solitude he needed. He 
built the first tower after his mother’s death in 
1923, adding new sections over a thirty-two- 
year period. Over the original door is chiselled 
in stone, “Sanctuary of Philemon, penitence of 
Fanst.” 


The feeling of repose and renewal that 
I had in this tower was intense from 
the start. It represented for me the 


Jung at Bollingen. maternal hearth . .. in which | could become what | was, 
Of lighting lanterns, what I am and will be. . . . At Bollingen I am in the midst of 
water-pumping, wood- my true life, | am most deeply myself. Here | am, as it were, 
cutting, firemaking, and the "age-old son of the mother". . . personality No. 2, who 
cooking, Jung said, ... exists outside time. ... 

‘These simple acts make | have done without electricity, and tend the fireplace 
nan simple.” 


and stove myself. Evenings, | light the old lamps. There is no 
running water, and | pump the water from the well. | chop 
the wood and cook the food. These simple acts make man 
simple; and how difficult it is to be simple! 
In Bollingen, silence surrounds me almost audibly, and | 
live “in modest harmony with nature.” Thoughts rise to the 
surface which reach back into the centuries, and according- 
y anticipate a remote future. . . . 

There |... see life in the round, as something forever 
coming into being and passing on." 


'ART Two: HEALER lor r INCRA 1 


Metaphors 


Jungs thinking deepened. Mythology, archetypes, and the collec- 
tive unconscious clarified as concepts and linked together. Myths 
are metaphors, “descriptions of psychic processes and develop- 
ment” which “connect us with the instinctive bases of our exis- 
tence.” Mythic ideas can be observed worldwide in mythology, 
fairy tales, and “in the dreams, visions and fantasies of normal and 
psychically ill persons.” 

While the intellect may see mythologizing as “futile specula- 
tion,” to the emotions it is “a healing and valid activity” which 
“expresses life more precisely than science” and allows it to be 


72 CARL JUNG 


Naming the Universe 
Painting by Judith 

Margolis, 1990. 

The mythic metaphor 
gives us a language for 
naming the ineffable. It 
can connect us to the 
greater universe as it 
allows us to penetrate our 
inner unconscious. 


WOUNDED HEALER OF THE SOUL 


lived out more innately than through a 
manmade code of ethics. 


An ethical fraternity, with its myth- 
ical Nothing, not infused by any 
archaic-infantile driving force, is 
a pure vacuum and can never 
evoke in man the slightest trace of 
that age-old animal power which 
drives the migrating bird across 
the sea... .12 


TE 


c» 3 


Moreover, he wrote, mythic life 
demands “a going beyond.” Its symbolic 
language gives “unimaginable” religious 
experience “an image, a form in which to 
express itself.” 


Taf 


Ld 
t 
er 


Myth is the revelation of a divine 
life in man. It is not we who invent 
myth, rather it speaks to us as a 
Word of God." 


Myths arise from the archetypes, “pri- 
mordial ideas of humanity," "basic pat- 
terns of instinct" which occur universally, 
“an imprint which implies an imprinter.” 


Detail of Lotus The archetypes . . . are not intellectually invented. They are 
Ink on silk by Piling, always there and they produce certain processes in the 
China, Yuan Dynasty, unconscious one could best compare with myths. That's the 
e1300; origin of mythology. Mythology is a dramatization of a series 
The newly rediscovered of images that formulate the life of the archetypes.14 


Chinese text, The Secret 


of the Golden Flower, » "E : . 
unfolded vital links for The archetypal "pattern" is to the unconscious what the biolog- 


Jung between the esoteric ical pattern is to the body. The archetypes together form the struc- 
thinking of Eastand West ture of the collective unconscious, the counterpart in the psyche to 
on the psychology of the collective conscious mind. 

the unconscious and 

brought "undreamed-of 

confirmation" of his 

own ideas. 


PART Two: HEALER METAPHORS 73 


OOM 


NUNN 


ie 


f 

L 
N 

P, 


N NA AV Z 


A~ 
Bu 


ununi ant 
"wa 044 14H : 


- ines 


| <2 : | 
E dmm 
= | Ww / 


\ 


| 


M 
W 


QNS 
LI 


| 


Sot 


OPPOSITE 
Preparing the Elixir of Life 


Woodcut of alchemical 
laboratory, Strassburg, 
1528. 


jung also studied the 
symbolic language of 
alchemy, a European 
tradition of transformative 
processes that unites the 
opposites to bring forth 
living knowledge. 


Part Two: HEALER 


Historic Counterparts 


d ese were ideas developed very much in isolation from the pro- 
fessional milieu of the day. Yet slowly Jung began to find parallels 
to his thinking elsewhere. Discarded Gnostic texts from early 
Christian times occupied him for eight years. The Gnostics too 
"had been confronted with the primal world of the unconscious 
and had dealt with its contents." But there were big gaps in the 
texts, and the time lapse of nearly 1800 years between their writing 
and the twentieth century was too wide to bridge. 

Then, in 1928, Oriental scholar Richard Wilhelm sent Jung a 
medieval manuscript of Chinese yoga and alchemy, The Secret of the 
Golden Flower, requesting him to write a psychological commentary 
on it. To Jung it brought "undreamed-of confirmation" of his own 
ideas. 


| had stumbled upon the historical counterpart of my psy- 
chology of the unconscious. The possibility of a comparison 
with alchemy, and the uninterrupted intellectual chain back 
to Gnosticism, gave substance to my psychology. When | 
pored over these old texts everything fell into place: the 
fantasy-images, the empirical material | had gathered in my 
practice, and the conclusions | had drawn from it... . My 
understanding of their typical character, which had already 
begun with my investigation of myths, was deepened. The 
primordial images and the nature of the archetype took a 
central place in my researches. . . .15 


Alchemy had already announced itself to Jung years earlier in a 
dream which he had not at that time understood. Learning to deci- 
pher the symbolic language of alchemy from sixteenth- and seven- 
teenth-century manuscripts absorbed him for more than a decade. 
Alchemy too faced the problem of matter, the feminine principle, 
and the union of Opposites: masculine and feminine, God and 
human being. 


Only after I had familiarized myself with alchemy did I real- 
ize that the unconscious is a process, and that the psyche is 
transformed or developed by the relationship of the ego to 
the contents of the unconscious. In individual cases that 
transformation can be read from dreams and fantasies. In 
collective life it has left its deposit principally in the various 
religious systems and their changing symbols. Through 


HISTORIC COUNTERPARTS 75 


the study of these col- 
lective transformation 
processes and through 
understanding of al- 
chemical symbolism | 
arrived at the central 
concept of my psych- 
ology: the process of 
individuation.1e 


For Jung, reaching to 
the "spiritual East" was 
not a replacement of West- 
ern culture but rather a 
filling of gaps in both it 
and ourselves, "a symbolic 
expression of the fact that 
we are entering into con- 
nection with the elements 
in ourselves which are 
strange to us." 

Ina letter he explained, 


You rightly say that it is as if my work "reached out beyond 
philosophy and theology." You could also say it begins 
"behind" both of them. But it is not due to any intention or 
activity of mine that the spiritual and historical analogy with 
the East gets into my way of looking at things. . . . It is not, 
however, the actual East we are dealing with but the collec- 
tive unconscious, which is omnipresent. . . . | have landed in 
the Eastern sphere through the waters of the unconscious, 
for the truths of the unconscious can never be thought up, 
they can be reached only by following a path which all cul- 
tures right down to the most primitive level have called the 
way of initiation.” 


76 CARL JUNG 


Consecration by Horus 
and Set of Seti I 


Tracing of Papyrus, Thebes, 
Nineteenth Dynasty, 
c. 1250 B.C.E. 


The deities are showering 
the pharaoh, Seti I, with 
Ankhs poured forth from 
the vases held in their 
hands. The Ankh is a 
symbol of life, fertility, 
and immortality. The 
Water of Life is poured 
over the initiate to 
symbolize his rebirth into 
new universal knowledge. 


WOUNDED HFEALFR OF THR Sont 


Jung at Bailey Island, 
Maine, 1936. 


“Jung was a mountain of 
a man—big enough to 
encompass every kind of 
person imaginable.” 


PART Two: HEALER 


Reminiscences 


Analyst and author Jane Wheelwright was a patient 
Jung’s in the 1930s. 


Jung was a mountain of a man — big enough to 
encompass every kind of person imaginable. All 
kinds of people big and small found through him 
their uniqueness. He touched all kinds of people 
who came his way. Sometimes it was through what 
he inadvertently said — more often than not some- 
thing he would not remember. Sometimes it was 
what he did. Mostly it was what he was: a compre- 
hensive, large, all-embracing, complete man. He 
spanned in himself everything from greatness and 
power to all-too-human failings. He could be irrita- 
ble and sometimes downright demanding. Explo- 
sions of rage were not uncommon. He even could 
be duped at times by unscrupulous, ambitious peo- 
ple. Sometimes he seemed to reduce to human 
ordinariness. At other times he seemed to expand — to lit- 
erally physically expand — to overpowering size. | remem- 
ber once experiencing him like this. | must have betrayed 
my feeling that he was beyond my reach because he said 
out of the blue, “Do I have horns on my head?” Jung was 
able to constellate the unconscious of countless numbers 
and kinds of people. It was an extraordinary gift that he 
had. ... believe he was at his best as an analyst. 


In Barbara Hannab’s biographical memoir of Jung she said, 


One of Jung's most striking characteristics was the fact that 
he never asked anything of people that he had not first 
asked of himself, and he told me once, when he was nearly 
sixty, that he could say his whole life had been spent in elim- 
inating his own childishness. He added ruefully, with that 
uncompromising honesty that was so convincing, that he 
was afraid there was still quite a bit left.19 


Jung has publicly acknowledged his own debt to his patients 


most of them women. 


From my encounters with patients and with the psychic 
phenomena which they have paraded before me in an 


REMINISENCES 


of 


77 


Jung on the porch of a 
library on Bailey Island, 
Maine, 1936. 


Bailey Island was a resort 
where Jung held a 
summer seminar. A 
patient of his in the 1930s 
felt his energy akin to 
Theodore Roosevelt, and 
his appearance to be 
"more like a stockbroker 
than a prophet." 


endless stream of images, | have learned an enormous 
amount — not just knowledge, but above all insight into my 
own nature. And not the least of what | have learned has 
come from my errors and defeats. | have had mainly women 
patients, who often entered into the work with extraordi- 
nary conscientiousness, understanding, and intelligence. It 
was essentially because of them that | was able to strike out 
on new paths in therapy.?? 


OPPOSITE 


Krishna Battling the Horse 
Demon Keshi 


Terracotta, India, 
fifth century. 


The God and Animal 
selves in combat. At 
nearly sixty, Jung admitted 
to a lifelong battle with 
his own demon of "child- 
Doctor Jung's patients must take a little steamboat at a ishness," which was still a 
landing haunted by gulls and wild ducks, and then walk a continuing threat. 


Former patient Elizabeth Shepley Sergeant has left this account 
of a consultation: 


78 CARL JUNG WOUNDED HEALER OF THE SOUL 


80 


good ten minutes to a yellow country house standing well 
within walls and gardens. . . . They must pull a shining brass 
bell and ... meet the inspection of a group of skirmishing 


dogs. 
Yoggi, the Doctor’s special intimate, always manages to 
slide into the upstairs study behind the visitor. . . . | noticed 


at my first interview that Jung’s hand — the sensitive, strong 
hand, with the Gnostic ring — reached down now and then 
to the shaggy back. And it came to me that this touch with 
an instinctive hairy being was somehow the riposte to the 
psychologist’s uncanny intuition, his probing mind, his acute 
awareness a reassurance to the visitor and to himself. For 
what is one to think of a doctor who, in a hunch of the 
shoulders, a half-glance, a witty phrase casually spoken — 
“You are like an egg without a shell” — can say enough to 
keep one guessing for a week? 

It was comfortable too, that as he discussed intimate 
problems, his face now very sober and concerned, Jung 
tramped the floor, fed the fire, lighted a meditative pipe: 
common clay and spirit were all one. When he sat stiffly in 
his chair for a moment and gulped down his tea, he 
suddenly turned into a German professor. But when his 
eyes began to twinkle merrily behind their gold-rimmed 
spectacles, when he moved about again, his driving energy 
strongly held in leash, | thought of Theodore Roosevelt. 
“You look more like a stockbroker than a prophet,” 
exclaimed a startled American who had expected to find 
the “mystic” of Freudian report. The actual Jung, solid and 
vital in his middle fifties, humorous and skeptical, refuses to 
stand on a pedestal or to take on any white-bearded Old 
Testament air. “Yes,” he agrees with a young lady, “all men 
are liars, certainly. | just let them sit in that chair and lie till 
they get tired of lying. Then they begin to tell the truth.” 
One leaves Jung’s presence feeling enriched and appeased, 
as by contact with a pine tree in the forest, a life as much 
below ground as above.?! 


And from Jane Wheelwright again: 


| had come to Zürich, stuck in a kind of modern hopeless- 
ness and isolation and two-dimensional ordinariness that 
seemed inevitable. Then, suddenly in Zürich, at last, there 
was life — even though at times it was expressed in strange, 
sometimes weird ways.?? 


CARL JUNG 


WOUNDED HEALER OF THE SOUL 


The Six Elements 

Oil painting by 

René Magritte, 1929. 

Jung said that we live in 
only one or two sections 
of our conscious selves 
and are out of touch with 
everything else within us. 
The individuation process 
prods us into awareness 
of our unconscious 

nature as it speaks to us in 
the language of symbols, 
observed mainly 

in our dreams. 


Part Two: HEALER 


The Individuation Process 


(P. eople," Jung observed, "live on only one or two floors of a large 

apartment building which is our minds, forgetting the rest." The 
individuation process puts us in touch with "the rest." Our con- 
scious "I" is not the total psyche. There is an unconscious back- 
ground that operates subliminally, whether we realize it or not. 
Plugging into those undertones and making them conscious 
enlarges and deepens our experience of ourselves and of life. The 
unconscious can be guide, friend, and adviser to the conscious. It 
speaks to us in the language of symbols, usually in the form of 
dreams. 

Going inward means looking for the signs and symbols the 
unconscious dreams up for us naturally and spontaneously. Ana- 
lyzing, interpreting, and synthesizing them into our being is the 
work of our conscious selves. The world of the unconscious is 
essentially an ambivalent one, with both negative and positive 
aspects at all its levels, which doesn't make it easy to understand. 
Often it begins to make itself felt out of a negative state, such as 
boredom or stagnation in life, or a blow to the ego, a wounding of 
the personality. 

The first layer we encounter in the unconscious is what Jung 
called the shadow, usually those parts of ourselves we don't like, 


THE INDIVIDUATION PROCESS 


don’t know, or don’t want to know. The shadow can be repressed ir 
us like a cancer or projected outward onto others as qualities we 
dislike most in a person or group. The negative shadow can presen 
us with a shortcoming to be overcome. The positive can show us i 
meaningful part of ourselves we should recognize and live out 


La. e fa we! 


You may shake your head incredulously when I tell you tha 
| would hardly have been able to form the concept of thi 


024 *a- Aetna Lanrnmn ann nf mv arasatac 


Blue Shadow Spirit 
Painting by Frank L: 


For each of us the Shado 
is a call to explore our 
lives in greater depth. 
Bringing it into light and 
dealing with its contents, 
whatever they may be, 
helps us to grow into a 
larger sense of our 


m 


var- e TF a lm o 


Bronze sculpture (Aqua- 
manile), Netherlanderish, 
c. 1400. 


For a man, acceptance of 
his anima brings a balance 
between outer and inner 
self; for a woman, her 
complementary animus 
gives a strong founda- 
tional base for living. 


Part Two: HEALER 


experiences, not just with regard to other people but with 
regard to myself. . . . 

My shadow is indeed so huge that | could not possibly 
overlook it in the plan of my life; in fact | had to see it as an 
essential part of my personality, accept the consequences of 
this realization, and take responsibility for them. Many bit- 
ter circumstances have forced me to see that though the sin 
one has committed or is can be regretted, it is not cancelled 
out. | don't believe in the tiger who was finally converted to 
vegetarianism and ate only apples. My solace was always 
Paul, who did not deem it beneath his dignity to admit he 
bore a thorn in the flesh.?? 


Psychotherapist Elizabeth Howes retained this personal 
impression from talks with Jung: 


This man did in fact accept the shadow and... this accep- 
tance brought problems and tensions but also aliveness, 
reality, integrity, and depth of being.? 


But as Jung explained in a letter, 


Recognizing the shadow is what | call the apprenticeship. 
But making out with the anima is what I call the masterpiece 
which not many bring off.” 


It is only through knowledge of the shadow that we reach this 
next layer of the psyche: anima, the female image within a man, or 
animus, the male part of a woman. 


Anima is the soul image of a man 
represented in dreams or fan- 
tasies by a feminine figure. It 
symbolizes the function of rela- 
tionship. The animus is the image 
of spiritual forces in a woman, 
symbolized by a masculine fig- 
ure. If a man or woman is uncon- 
scious of these inner forces, they 
appear in a projection.?6 


The anima is influenced by the expe- 


rience of the mother, the animus by the 
father, with effects that can be negative 


THE INDIVIDUATION PROCESS 83 


Column capital, Bamberg 
Cathedral, Bamberg, 
Germany. 


Photo by Clive Hicks. 


The Green Man, a 
European vegetative spirit, 
is an archetypal animus 
figure, potent and 
generative. Although 
pre-Christian, he found 
his way into the church 

by appearing in hidden 
places of sacred 
buildings. 


or positive. Images of the anima can range from primitive woman 
to romanticized beauty, the Virgin Mary as spiritualized eros, or a 
goddess of wisdom as mediator to the world within. The animus 
can be personified, or projected, as physical Tarzan, romantic poet, 
man of action, political power hero, or wise guide to spiritual truth 
and meaning. 

Writer Margaret Flinters went to Jung when he was still formu- 
lating the anima/animus terms of his psychology. She was then a 
person alienated from husband, family, work, and the world. 


Bringing me down to earth . . . was literally the problem and 
he succeeded brilliantly. | don't know how he did it quite. 


84 CARL JUNG WouNDED HEALER OF THE SOUL 


Wood ceris. Dogon, 
Mali 16th-19th century. 

IO Brow together and 
bring about completiu:, 
in relationship both man 
and woman cat help 


de velop in the one iti 


gilts of the other 


PART Iwo. Meaucn 


First of all I think it was his own peasant solidity which gave 
me the feeling | was in touch with a real man for the first 
time in my life. All the others were wraiths. Second — | sup- 
pose — he made me see that | had a ghost somewhere 
inside me, directing me. It was what he later called the 
animus, a sort of archetypal animus-figure of the father of 
all nature. My own father — who was a perfectionist — 
wouldn’t have any truck with anything which didn’t match 
up to the best standards. That was part of my trou- 
ble too. My husband fell short of my ideal. My 
writing was not perfect. | was afraid of having a 
child in case it wasn’t brilliant. | don’t clearly 
understand transference — but something like 
that took place — Jung becoming a much more 
tolerant, much less exacting father figure — and 
of course the repressed love | had for my father 
burst out all over him and he found it — I know — 
damned inconvenient. It must have been a terrible 
trial to him.?7 


In Civilization in Transition, Jung wrote, 


A human relationship leads into the world of the 
psyche, into that intermediate realm between 
sense and spirit, which contains something of 
both and yet forfeits nothing of its own unique 
character. 

Into this territory a man must venture if he 
wishes to meet woman half way. Circumstances 
have forced her to acquire a number of masculine 
traits, so that she shall not remain caught in an 
antiquated, purely instinctual femininity, lost and 
alone in the world of men. So, too, man will be 
forced to develop his feminine side, to open his 
eyes to the psyche and to Eros. It is a task he can- 
not avoid. . . .28 


The path inward is largely via dreams, which Jung described as 
"the invisible roots of our conscious thoughts." 

He told Laurens van der Post that he worked through 67,000 
dreams with patients and helpers before even attempting to theo- 
rize about them. "Dreams," he said "are facts," "specific expres- 
sions of our unconscious" which "somehow make sense." In them 
the unconscious is trying to become conscious. It uses symbols 


THE INDIVIDUATION PROCESS — 85 


common to all mankind in an entirely individual way. The 
dreamer holds the personal “key” to interpretation. The ability to 
establish communication with the unconscious is part of the whole 
person. 

Dreams reflect many layers of our psyche. At surface level they 
can show personal contents that have been absorbed subliminally 
or pushed from the conscious to the upper end of the unconscious. 
They can also tell us more about ourselves, about other people or 
events. They can project forward as well as backward in time. From 
deeper in, new contents can arise revealing creative ideas or germs 
of future emotional conditions in our psyche. 

Then there are the “big” archetypal dreams of the collective 
unconscious, often using symbols of a religious or mythological 
nature and numinously tinged. The meandering pattern of dreams, 
observed over a long period of time, reveals the gradual degrees of 
psychic growth that characterizes the individuation process. This 
inner growth then slowly emerges into conscious life as a fuller and 
more mature personality. 

Active imagination was the method invented by Jung to 
amplify and activate dream or fantasy images. It is a way of 
meditating imaginatively, without conscious goal or program, on 
objective hints being thrown up by the unconscious. 


The initial question to be directed ... would be: “Who or 
what has come alive? . . . Who or what has entered my psy- 
chic life and created disturbances and wants to be heard?" 
To this you should add: "Let it speak!" Then switch off your 


Memories 

Oil painting by 

Tobi Zausner, 1981. 

Our dreams propel us 
into a landscape of 
universal symbols, which 
can speak both to our 
deepest personal realities 
and to the collective 
archetypal world that 
underpins them. 


86 CARL JUNG WOUNDED HEALER OF THE SOUL 


The Toilers of the Sea 


Painting by Albert P. Ryder, 
early 1880s. 


Jung has said that 

the unconscious, long 
identified as the oceanic 
in man, is Nature. The 
seeker of himself often 
feels cast adrift, setting a 
course between light and 
dark but ultimately moved 
along by unseen currents 
deep within. 


Part Two: HEALER 


noisy consciousness and listen 
quietly inwards and look at the 
images that appear before your 
inner eye, or hearken to the 
words which the muscles of 
your speech apparatus are try- 
ing to form. Write down what 
then comes without criticism. 
Images should be drawn or 
painted assiduously no matter 
whether you can do it or not. 
Once you have got at least 
fragments of these contents, 
then you may meditate on 
them afterwards. Don’t criti- 
cize anything away! If any ques- 
tions arise, put them to the 
unconscious again the next day. 
Don’t be content with your 
own explanations no matter 


— 


how intelligent they are. . . . 
Treat any drawings the same way. Meditate on them 
afterwards and every day go on developing what is unsatis- 
factory about them. The important thing is to let the uncon- 
scious take the lead.?? 


But it may not take over exclusively. 


It is under all conditions a most advisable thing to keep to 
the conscious and rational side, i.e., to maintain that side. 
One never should lose sight of it. It is the safeguard without 
which you would lose yourself on unknown seas. You would 
invite illness, indeed, if you should give up your conscious 
and rational orientation. On the other hand, it is equally 
true that life is not only rational. To a certain extent you have 
to keep your senses open to the nonrational aspects of 
existence. ... 

The unconscious itself is neither tricky nor evil — it is 
Nature, both beautiful and terrible.... The best way of 
dealing with the unconscious is the creative way. . . .?? 


There is no point in delivering yourself over to the last 
drop. . . . In my view it is absolutely essential always to have 
our consciousness well enough in hand to pay sufficient 
attention to our reality, to the Here and Now?! 


THE INDIVIDUATION PROCESS 


87 


Active imagination, dreams, anima/animus, the shadow — 
they are all stations along the way to an acceptance of ourselves as 
we are, to letting life be. Jung quoted this letter from a former 
patient as a summing up of this “in simple and pertinent words.” 


Out of evil, much good has come to me. By keeping quiet, 
repressing nothing, remaining attentive, and by accepting 
reality — taking things as they are, and not as | wanted them 
to be — by doing all this, unusual knowledge has come to 
me, and unusual powers as well, such as | could never have 
imagined before. | always thought that when we accepted 
things they overpowered us in some way or other. This turns 
out not to be true at all, and it is only by accepting them that 


88 CARL JUNG 


Wolf Devouring the King 


Alchemical engraving from 
Atalanta Fugiens by 
Michael Maier, Frankfurt, 
1618. 


Perhaps the process of life 
is to eat and be eaten— 

to experience the full 
range that exists between 
the ever-becoming and 
ever-dying in time. Free- 
dom exists beyond the 
constant dichotomies. 


WOUNDED HEALER OF THE SOUL 


one can assume an attitude towards them. So now | intend 
to play the game of life, being receptive to whatever comes 
to me, good and bad, sun and shadow that are forever alter- 
nating, and in this way, also accepting my own nature 
with its negative and positive sides. Thus everything 
becomes more alive to me. What a fool | was! How I tried 
to force everything to go according to the way I thought it 
ought to.?? 


Jung called this attitude “religious in the highest sense,” adding 
that “only on the basis of such an attitude will a higher level of con- 
sciousness and culture be possible."3? 


By bearing the opposites we can expose ourselves to life in 
our humanity. ... We have to realize the evil is in us; we 
have to risk life to get into life, then it takes on color, other- 
wise we might as well read a book. . . .34 


The opus consists of three parts; insight, endurance and 
action. ... It is conflicts of duty that make endurance 
and action so difficult. The one must exist and so must 
the other. There can be no resolution, only patient 
endurance of the opposites, which ultimately spring from 
your own nature. You yourself are a conflict that rages in 
and against itself in order to melt its incompatible sub- 
stances, the male and the female, in the fire of suffering and 
thus create that fixed and unalterable form which is the goal 

of life. ... We are crucified between the opposites and 
delivered up to the torture until the reconciling third 
takes shape.?5 


The "reconciling third" that appears is the innermost 
nucleus of the psyche, the organizing center that includes 
the ego but is not defined by it, a transpersonal, transcen- 
dent reality that Jung named the Self. The encounter with 
the Self is a centering which brings about a completion of the 
individuation process. 
In a woman's dreams, the Self can be personified in female form 
as a priestess, earth mother, or goddess of love; in a man's it 
the all and the nothing. appears as a male guru, wise old man, or spirit of nature. This psy- 
The emptiness enclosed is Chic image of the transcendent can also be Cosmic Man, a divine or 
defined by the circle, but royal couple, a person that is both male and female, young and old, 
the circle itself is only the or an animal, crystal, round stone, or mandala. Whatever the sym- 
space that is “nota circle.” bol, its meaning is wholeness, totality. 


Enzo 
The Zen enzo embodies 


Part Two: HEALER THE INDIVIDUATION PROCESS — 89 


Jung quoted St. Bonaventure in defining his 
concept of the Self as “a circle whose center is 
everywhere and whose circumference is 
nowhere.” 

In a letter to Pastor Walter Bernet he enlarged 
further: 


The goal seems to be anticipated by archetyp- 
al symbols which represent something like the 
circumambulation of a center. With increasing 
approximation to the center there is a corre- 
sponding depotentiation of the ego in favor of 
the influence of the “empty” center which is 
certainly not identical with the archetype but 
is the thing the archetype points to. As the 
Chinese would say, the archetype is only the 
name of Tao, not Tao itself. Just as the Jesuits 
translated Tao as “God,” so we can describe 
the “emptiness” of the center as “god.” Empti- 
ness in this sense doesn’t mean “absence” or 
“vacancy,” but something unknowable which 
is endowed with the highest intensity. . . . 1 call 
this unknowable the Self.... The whole 
course of individuation is dialectical, and the 
so-called “end” is the confrontation of the ego 
with the “emptiness” of the center.? 


“Everything essential,” Jung said, "happens in the Self and the Nubian Tribute Bearer 
ego functions as a receiver, spectator, and transmitter."?7 “Free will Ivory, Mesopotamia, 
is doing gladly and freely that which one must do.”** It is the Self eighth century B.C.E. 
that gives the ego inner power for the creative renewal of life. Jung reminds us that true 
Nevertheless the Self, like all of life, has dual aspects, its worst psychic health demands 
being megalomania or a form of possession. Positive and negative true humanity, which is 
have to be negotiated. And, if living in two worlds is the natural the ability to connect with 
state of the developed human being, it nevertheless imposes a *^d balance the inner and 


responsibility to maintain a balance between inner and outer reality. EE T iis d 


and the animal, seeking 


If one can stay in the middle, know one is human, relate to not to reject life's many 
both the god and the animal of the god, one is all right. One aspects but to embrace 
must remember, over the animal is the god, with the god is them in full. 


the god's animal.?? 


90 CARL JUNG WOUNDED HEALER OF THE SOUL 


= Healer at Work 


Jung approached the 1930s with this 
definition of himself in response to an 
anonymous woman who had made a 
portrait of him: 


There is some likeness in the 
upper story but the ensemble is 
not satisfactory. ... My exterior 
is in strange contrast to my spir- 
it. When | am dead nobody will 
think that this is the corpse of 
one with spiritual aspirations. | 
am the clash of opposites. That 
makes it frightfully difficult to 
get me right.^? 


That human range can be seen in 
everything Jung did, including his 
therapy work. In reckoning the effec- 
tiveness of his treatments with patients, 

— Hm — - —--—--  hereported one third really cured, one 
d © third considerably improved, and one 
f Jung third not essentially influenced although, even then, post-treatment 
Peter results could show years later. Jane Wheelwright recounted her ini- 
tial meeting with Jung as his patient. 
n this portrait, lung's 
dly earthy strength "So you're in the soup too," had been one of Jung's opening 
ind seeking spirit are remarks — (he loved American slang). . . . 
Boum. ne COC ae? In my first appointment . . . he asked me what my atti- 
tude towards him was. | said he would be a catalyst for me. 
I had read Jung and | was painfully aware of the people 
around him who had become hopelessly enmeshed in his 
aura and who seemed to have lost their identity in the 
sticky, gluey substance of the transference. | was bound not 
to be one of these. He agreed with me that would be his 
role. But not long afterwards | heard him say in a gently 
pleading way from deep down in his humanity, "Can't you 
see me as a human being?" It was then my objectivity col- 
lapsed. | would let myself in for whatever would happen, 
and the give-and-take between us was launched. Needless 
to say, the analysis in the long run established that new 


himselt to be a "clash 


PART Two: HEALER HEALER AT WORK 91 


Detail of coffin of 
Khnumnakhte 


Painted wood, Twelfth 
Dynasty (c. 1991-1786 
B.C.E.), Egypt. 

Horus, whose right eye 

is the sun and left eye 
the moon, heals the very 
earth with his penetrating 
vision. Born of a loving 
goddess and a dismem- 
bered and resurrected 
father, it is he who serves 
humanity. 

For Jung, “only the 
wounded physician 
heals,” and then only to 
the extent that he has 
healed himself. 


attitude and new insight and sense of myself that has 
remained the core of my being to this day. It also convinced 
me of the importance of a real relationship in the analytical 
hour. Outside of his study Jung was formal and polite.” 


He saw his role as doctor in terms not usual for his time. 


When important matters are at stake, it makes all the differ- 
ence whether the doctor sees himself as a part of the dra- 
ma, or cloaks himself in his authority.?? 


I learned . . . [at Burghólzli] that only the physician who feels 
himself deeply affected by his patients could heal. It works 
only when the doctor speaks out of the center of his own 
psyche so provisionally called “normal” to the sick psyche 
before him that he can hope to heal. ... 

In the end, only the wounded physician heals and even 
he, in the last analysis, cannot heal beyond the extent to 
which he has healed himself. 


Jung sat opposite his patients in direct communication as one 
human being to another. Words — and their underlying hinterland, 
body language and dreams — were the fishing nets of the person- 
al story. Once brought up for air, shared, and treated, however 


92 CARLJUNG WOUNDED HEALER OF THE SOUL 


unorthodoxly, the contents were inevitably returned to the indi- 


vidual as a precious possession best understood personally. 


Nothing worse could happen to one than to be completely 
understood. . .. One would be instantly deprived of one’s 
personal raison d'être if one were. I'd hate it myself. . . . 

Understanding is . . . at times a veritable murder of the 
soul as soon as it flattens out vitally important differences. 
The core of the individual is a mystery of life which is 
snuffed out when it is “grasped.”44 


Sometimes Jung's methods were reminiscent of shamanic prac- 


tice, as Jane Wheelwright told it. 


Jung’s concrete approach, emphasizing so vividly the reality 
of the psyche, is what impressed. . .. My experience of 
Jung’s concrete approach, apart from presenting himself as 
a person, not a doctor, came in an incident early in the 
analysis. | had confessed to Jung | feared insanity, a com- 
mon feeling when one is close to the collective. It had been 


Eskimo Shaman 


Stone carving by Lucassie Ohaytook, 
1966. 


A shamanic healer can embody both 
disease and cure for the patient. His 
ability to jump across all boundaries 
— of time, space, and being — at 
once is his healing gift. 


Part Two: HEALER HEALER AT WORK 


95 


doctor/ patient encounter in her book 
Jung’s Last Years: 


a secret fear. He made a grab in the 
air towards me with both hands as 
if catching a football and then hug- 
ging it to himself said “Now I have 
it and you will not fear any longer." 

As | remember it the fear disap- 
peared at that moment. 


Aniela Jaffe included this unusual 


Once a simple young girl was 
shown into his consulting room, a 
schoolteacher from a village. ...A 
doctor, personally unknown to 
Jung, had sent her to him. She suf- 
fered from almost total insomnia 
and was one of those people who 
agonize over having done nothing 
properly and not having met satis- 
factorily the demands of daily life. What she needed was 
relaxing. Jung tried to explain this to her, and told her that 
he himself found relaxation by sailing on the lake, letting 
himself go with the wind. But he could see from her eyes 
that she didn’t understand. This saddened him, because he 
wanted to help her, and there was only this single consulta- 
tion to do it in. 

“Then,” said Jung, “as | talked of sailing and of the wind, 
| heard the voice of my mother singing a lullaby to my little 
sister as she used to do when | was eight or nine, a story of 
a little girl in a little boat, on the Rhine, with little fishes. And 
I began, almost without doing it on purpose, to hum what | 
was telling her about the wind, the waves, the sailing, and 
relaxation, to the tune of the little lullaby. | hummed those 
sensations, and I could see that she was 'enchanted'" 

The consultation came to an end, and Jung had to send 
the girl away. Two years later, at a congress, he met the doc- 
tor who had sent her to him. The doctor pressed Jung to tell 
him what kind of therapy he had used, because, he said, the 
insomnia had completely disappeared after the girl's visit to 
Küsnacht and had never come back again... . Naturally 
Jung was rather embarrassed. 


94 CARL JUNG 


Detail from Young Woman 
in Garden 


Oil painting by 

Mary Cassatt, c. 1886. 
Jung’s intuition could 
lead him into unusual 
methods of healing, 
sometimes very simple in 
form. He cured a young 
village girl of insomnia in 
one consultation by spon- 
taneously humming to 
her a lullaby about nature 
that he remembered his 
mother singing to his 
sister when he was a boy. 


WOUNDED HEALER OF THE SOUL 


Medicinal Flora 


Painting by Paul Klee, 
1924. 


The healer has many 
natural methods at his 
disposal including the 
herbalist's art and his 

own inner store of being. 
Each can be potent 
medicine. Imagination, 
memory, and the beauty 
of the earth can all evoke 
the breath of life. 


Part Two: HEALER 


“How was | to explain to him that | had simply listened 
to something within myself? | had been quite at sea. How 
was | to tell him that | had sung her a lullaby with my 
mother’s voice? Enchantment like that is the oldest form of 
medicine.”*¢ 


At a European conference in the 1930s, where Jung’s “earthy 
matter of factness” and “at the same time somewhat Mephistophe- 
lian effect” on the gathering had been noted, he fielded some rather 
pious questions about his “mission” and “who his client really 
was” in distinctly no-nonsense style. 


| am Herr Jung and nobody else, and there is Miss so-and- 
so. It would not be nice at all if | could not treat such sick 
people. Besides, I have a certain zest for work. | am enter- 
prising; | have a pioneering spirit. If any kind of screwball at 
all comes to the door, the explorer in me is awakened, my 
curiosity, my spirit of adventure, my sympathy. It touches my 
heart, which is too soft — and people my size usually have 
something of this; they try to conceal it, but like fools they 
don't succeed — and | enjoy seeing what can be done with 
such a crazy fellow. | have made a game out of healing even 
difficult cases. This is simply a kind of curiosity and sense of 
adventure. ... 

I can tell you this: When you have to exhaust yourself 
terribly for a person and you don’t get paid for it, in time 


HEALER AT WORK 95 


you lose your taste for it. So | confront the patient as a com- 
pletely ordinary person, with all his pros and cons.*7 


Stories of Jung's interaction with his patients range from human 
solicitude to "Go away, you bore me." Jane Wheelwright observed 
the opposites in Jung at work. 


At times Jung's concern for the individual was touching. It 
did not matter of what color, class, condition the person 
was, nor how educated. It did not matter from where he 
came if he was true to himself and sincere in his own quest. 

| remember Jung's excitement when a clerk from some 
humble office from our anonymous Midwest, having saved 
up enough money, got himself to Zürich to see Jung. He had 
questions about Jung's writings and he needed to know 
more. Jung gave him an appointment immediately and at a 
time when he had already been turning people away for 
lack of time. He obviously admired this little man and 
wanted to honor him. Perhaps he had found another loner 
with courage and independence and determination even 
though on a humble level? It was a sight to see this great 
man so touched and flattered and happy that so little a man 
had sought him out. On other occasions Jung could be 
harsh, and, at times, it seemed, heartless. He may have had 
his legitimate reasons, but it was hard to know. There was, 
for instance, a woman who had been analyzing for years in 
preparation for analysis with him. The day came when he 
would take her on. She was overcome in anticipation or by 
his presence. 

For whatever reason, she melted into tears. This went 
on for every appointment for a considerable length of 
time. He coped with her dissolved state by reading the 
newspaper. ... 

Still another woman | knew told me she went to an 
enormous effort to write a play as homework for her analy- 
sis. She finally proudly presented it to him. He handed it 
back without reading it. He must have rebelled at her slav- 
ish effort to please him. And as far as | know she never 
wrote again.^ 


If Jung didn't understand a patient's dreams, or if he thought 
they'd be better off with a Freudian or Adlerian approach, he 
referred them elsewhere. He told Joseph Wheelwright nobody had 
“the whole truth" — Freud, Adler, or Jung: "We each have our own 


96 CARL JUNG WOUNDED HEALER OF THR Som. 


Pigeon’s Egg Head 

Going to and Returning 
from Washington 

Oil painting by George 
Catlin, 1837-1839. 

Some so-called neurotics 
are divided against them- 
selves, not because of any 
deep emotional problem, 
but because modern soci- 
ety imposes a straitjacket 
of thought and feeling, 
and confines to one 
dimension those who 
would naturally live in two 
worlds. Whether they 
were “optional neurotics” 
or those with “a primitive 
and modern split,” Jung 
sought to connect them 

to a deeper, more authen- 
tic sense of themselves. 


laxi Two: HEALER 


truth." The relative validity of both Freud's pleasure and Adler's 
power principle he acknowledged while recognizing that neither 
exhausted the full expression of psychic wholeness. Many "so- 
called neurotics" were "divided against themselves" because of the 
onesidedness of the society they lived in, becoming what he called 
“optional neurotics." 


If they had lived in a period and in a milieu in which man 
was still linked by myth with the world of the ancestors, and 
thus with nature truly experienced and not merely seen 
from outside, they would have been spared this division 
within themselves. | am speaking of those who cannot tol- 
erate the loss of myth and who neither find a way to a mere- 
ly exterior world as seen by science, nor rest satisfied with 
an intellectual juggling with words, which has nothing what- 
ever to do with wisdom . . . their apparent morbidity drops 
away the moment the gulf between the ego and the uncon- 
scious is closed.*9 


Jane Wheelwright counted herself “fortunate” in having the 
“primitive and modern split” that Jung was interested in studying 
in 1935, especially as it manifested in 
people in the second half of life, 
where he himself was. 


Mine had been caused by an 
identification with nature in a 
wilderness area... where not 
even an Indian culture sur- 
vived to mitigate its potency. 
On top of this | was sent to 
sophisticated schools and col- 
leges as my introduction to 
civilization. Somehow | felt | 
must make a quantum leap 
from the social level of Stone 
Age woman to the twentieth 
century and Jung could help 
me. It was sheer luck that | 
appeared on his doorstep in 
that phase of his life. 

Jung was definitely the 
patriarch and was paternalistic. 
His very physical dimension 


HEALER AT WORK 97 


Entwined Buddha 


Photograph by Linda 
Connor, Ayuthaya, 
Thailand, 1988. 


The face of Buddha, firmly 
entwined with visible 
roots. Buddha is said to 
have attained enlighten- 
ment at the foot of the 
Bodhi Tree. 


promoted such a role. But | feel, because of his discovery of 
his anima and his enormous popularity with women, as well 
as getting support for his new radical ideas from them, 
especially American women, he, at least theoretically, wanted 
women to improve their lot and make their legitimate way 
into the professions. He was not, however, altogether con- 
vincing in his behavior. When | encountered him about the 
first appointment he said he would discuss the time and day 
with my husband. I said, “What about me?" with the usual 
American indignation. He said rather clumsily, "That will 
come later.” | give this episode only because it shows him in 
his spontaneity referring to the man as the controller of a 
woman's fate. But because of my work with him and the 
momentum it engendered, I found in the long run my true 
female independence. Besides, | could also, finally, thanks to 
him, outgrow my total dependence on his ideas and develop 
some of my own. ... 

Jung's broad vision did . . . constellate for me specifically 
my need to strive towards being a free modern woman with 
my roots planted deeply in the soil of archaic woman.5? 


Helping people to independence of his authority by reaching 
inside to their own was the essence of the work. 


98 CARL JUNG WOUNDED HEALER OF THE So! 


Detail from Sixteen Lohans 


Handscroll by Wu Pin, China, 
Ming Dynasty, c. 1583-1626. 


The man who has mastered him- 
self can, by balancing on the law 
of dharma, walk on water—that 
is, he can see above the churning 
of his unconscious. 


To be truly an individual, we 

have to be prepared to meet life 
with the confidence and surety 
that it will teach real lessons. 
Growth is work; our tool is our 
own unflinching ability to see the 
truth about ourselves that comes 
from within and forges hard-won 
equanimity. 


| consider it my task and duty to educate my patients and 
pupils to the point where they can accept the direct 
demand that is made upon them from within. . . .>1 


There is a reasonable amount of certainty that we can show 
a person what there is, but we cannot hand out the thing 
which he ought to do. . . . 

There would be no difficulty in life if one always knew 
beforehand how to do a thing. Life is some sort of art and 
not a straight rail or a ready made product to be had at 
every corner. .. . 


^' Two: HEALER HEALER AT WORK 


99 


Nobody can live it for you or instead of you. Your life is 
what you try to live. If I should try to put you through some- 
thing it would be my life and not yours.?? 


If you want to go your individual way it is the way you make 
for yourself, which is never prescribed, which you do not 
know in advance, and which simply comes into being of 
itself when you put one foot in front of the other. If you 
always do the next thing that needs to be done, you will go 
most safely and surefootedly along the path prescribed by 
your unconscious.?? 


In her final session with Jung, social activist Isabelle Hamilton 
Rey was told to "Go home and live it now." As she wrote to her 
husband, 


| did what I came here to do — touch the hem of Dr. Jung’s 
psychological skirt — but it all seems so different now; | 
think 1 looked for a sort of spiritual baptism, which would 
insure protection and perfect understanding; instead it 
seems to me I have undertaken the tremendous responsi- 
bility of maintaining a standard of consciousness which is 
most difficult. | can never turn back, but God knows the 
prospect ahead isn't easy either.>4 


As Jung told Alan Watts, he was glad he wasn't a Jungian "I'm 
C. G. Jung." 


I do not want anyone to be a Jungian.... | want people 
above all to be themselves. . . . Should | be found one day 
only to have created another "ism" then | will have failed in 
all I tried to do.>> 


100 CARL JUNG WOUNDED HEALER OF THE SOUL 


Helpers: 
Emma, Toni 


Some of Jung’s patients went on to become 
lifelong friends and to help carry his ideas to 
the world. Some became analysts themselves. 
In Zürich, two of the people he recommended 
patients to as analysts were "either my wife or 
Frl. T. Wolff."56 

Emma also helped to develop the anima/ 
animus aspect of the individuation process. 
Jung encouraged her to learn Latin and Greek, 
which he himself read with ease, to help her 
studies. Her research into the Holy Grail leg- 
end later became a book completed by Marie- 
Louise von Franz, herself a one-time patient 
who became an analyst and foremost world 
authority on Jungian ideas. 

Emma was the first president of the Psy- 
Emma Jung in her study chological Club when it was founded in 1916 as a lecture venue 


ast home in Küsnacht. cum library cum social meeting place for analysts, patients, and 
Asweil as becoming an pupils. Later, when the C. G. Jung Institute was opened, she taught 
analyst, Mrs. Jung helped there. 

develop the anima/animus Author Sallie Nichols was one of her students. 


aspect of the individua- 
lion process and did 


I didn't work analytically with Mrs. Jung, and I didn't know 
fick on the Holy Grail her personally, but ! did attend her excellent course on the 
Bend Which later - Grail Legend. Each class ended with a brief question period, 
became a book. and | had always observed and admired the simple yet 
knowledgeable way Mrs. Jung fielded all questions from the 
most erudite and challenging ones to those that were more 
pedantic, or even naive. 

But, one day something very unusual happened. Some- 
one raised what appeared to be a very elementary question 
of fact, to which I assumed Mrs. Jung would respond briefly, 
but courteously as always. However, on this occasion she 
did not answer the question at all! There was a silence. Then 
she said quite simply, "I don't know the answer to that. I just 
never thought of this question before!" 

I was absolutely dumbfounded! Here sat one of the 
greatest living authorities on the Grail Legend, the wife of 
“the” C. G. Jung, if you please, teaching a course at the 


extensive independent 


Part Two: HEALER HELPERs: EMMA, TONI 


l 
Ear] 


august C. G. Jung Institute in Zürich and she was perfectly 
willing to sit there and admit that she not only didn't know 
the answer to this relatively simple question, but that the 
question itself had never occurred to her! . . . 

In the midst of my concern for Mrs. Jung's supposed 
embarrassment, | suddenly realized that the “embarrass- 
ment" was entirely my own! Mrs. Jung, far from feeling 
embarrassed, humiliated, chagrined, guilty, ignorant, or any- 
thing of the sort, was enjoying the situation immensely! 
She was laughing in the most spontaneous and free way 
imaginable. . . . 

The seminar ended that day with all of us joining Mrs. 
Jung in her laughter.?? 


Jung at first discouraged Toni Wolff from becoming an analyst 
because he thought her literary gifts as lyric poet would be over- 
shadowed. It would appear as if, indeed, she didn't fully develop 
that gift and never sought publication of what she did write. She 
did become an analyst and assistant to Jung, pioneering new psy- 
chological ground in her own right with her analysis of female 
typology. As president of the Psychological Club for two decades, 
the outwardly stern, inwardly hypersensitive Toni steered the club 
through its most flourishing years. Sallie Nichols was in analysis 


with her. 


102 


| worked with Miss Wolff for over a year... . 

Although she was not a tall woman, she gave me that 
impression, sitting ramrod straight behind her desk in what 
| remember as a rather high-backed chair. . . . 

But despite her aristocratic bearing and her impeccably 
tailored clothes, Miss Wolff was one of the most down-to- 
earth practical human beings l've ever known. Her quiet 
empathy with the most common human dilemmas and her 
no-nonsense reactions were strictly contemporary. . . . 

I experienced Miss Wolff as a woman of rare passion, 
compassion, and wisdom. ... | had learned that my hus- 
band had embarked upon a romance with a European 
woman. ... Way down deep | didn't honestly believe that | 
and my three "innocent" progeny were about to be tossed 
out into the snow forever. But the role of Wounded Wife is 
a tempting one. . . . So, of course, | went blubbering to Miss 
Wolff with my woes. She listened attentively and sympa- 
thetically to my interminable trials, but when I at last came 
up for breath, she made a suggestion that still startles me. 


CARL JUNG 


WOUNDED HEALER OF THE SOUL 


“Why don’t you ask this other woman 
to lunch tomorrow?” 

“You mean, a wee drop of arsenic in 
the tea?” I asked, hope of deliverance 
shining through my tears. 

“By no means,” replied Miss Wolff 
sternly. “But, you would then get to know 
her a bit, you might even like her.” Then 
after a pause, Miss Wolff added this: “You 
know, sometimes if a man’s wife is big 
enough to leap over the hurdle of self- 
pity, she may find that her supposed rival 
has even helped the marriage! This ‘other 
woman’ can sometimes help a man live 
out certain aspects of himself that his 
wife either can’t fulfill, or else doesn’t 
especially want to. As a result, some of 
the wife’s energies are now freed for her 
own creative interests and development, 
often with the result that the marriage not 
only survives, but emerges even stronger 
than before!” 
foni Wolff and Jung at But | did not follow Miss Wolff's advice. ... | preferred 
Swansee, England, 1922. nursing my fantasy of my rival as a ^wicked witch' to facing 
Ioni Wolff became an her human reality. Since then, l've often wished I had found 
analyst and an assistant to the courage to ask her to. . . lunch!58 


lung, pioneering an anah 


si5 of female psyt he logy 


While Emma and Toni are known to have worked together for 
a time with a male colleague of Jung’s to analyze the complexities 
of their personal situation, the trio’s public lives were readily seen, 
as noted by author Dr. Joseph Henderson. 


and contributing to his 


book Psychological Types 


Their social relationship . . . could be observed by those of 
us who knew and worked with them analytically during the 
1920s and 30s. .. . 

A socially prominent couple from New York . . . wanted 
to give a dinner party for C. G., Emma, and Toni before 
a Chinese Ball, a fancy dress benefit at the Grand Hotel 
Dolder. . . . It was a delightful evening .. . with everyone in 
good humor, done up in some form of Chinese coat or 
mildly disguised with an oriental eye makeup in prepara- 
tion for the ball... . 

Jung, true to habit in his own milieu, was full of energy 
for making the party a success. ... I recall no strain or 


PAET: Two: HEALER HELPERS: EMMA, TONI 103 


tension between Emma Jung and Toni Wolff. They seemed 
perfectly at ease with each other as was Jung with each of 
them. 

At other times in later years | was aware that Jung was 
careful to give Emma and Toni their affectionate places in 
his public life. When he came to deliver the Tavistock Lec- 
tures in 1935 he brought Toni Wolff as his companion and 
hostess. | remember the surprise and pleasure of the 
Englishwomen who met her at her elegance in wearing a 
different striking hat for each occasion. Two years later in 
1937 Jung again came to London to give a public lecture 


104 CARL JUNG 


WOUNDED HEALER OF THE SOU 


OPPOSITE 


Detail from group 
photograph from the 
Third International 
Psychoanalytic Congress, 
Weimar, Germany, 1911. 


Front row, second left, 
Emma Jung; far right, Toni 
Wolff, representative from 
Zurich. Second row, far 
left, Sigmund Freud, rep- 
resentative from Vienna; 
next right, Carl Jung, rep- 
resentative from Küs- 
nacht. This is one of the 
few photos of Jung, 
Emma, and Toni together. 


after a trip to America and this time his companion and 
hostess was Emma Jung who had her own style and dignity. 

Fowler McCormick, a businessman and philanthropist 
from Chicago, was a close friend of the Jung family and he 
often told me in later years how deeply the Jungs and Toni 
were respected in their own circle for keeping their person- 
al problems to themselves. Even the Jung children did not 
know of their father’s close relation to Toni until long after 
it began, even though they often saw her in their home. He 
felt, and | would corroborate this impression, that as nearly 
as possible in our monogamous society, Jung found two 
wives in these women. . . .?? 


Portraits at the Stock Exchange 
Postel by Edgar Degas. 

Although very unusual for its time, 
or any time, Jung's relationship 
with both Emma and Toni was 


Ve eee 


openly known. ft had a public face 
at social gatherings and interna- 
tional lectures as well as its 

private aspect 


Pant Two: HEALER 


HELPERS: EMMA, TONI 105 


Family Life 


The five Jung children were brought up along liberal lines, with 
their father teaching them comparative religions and allowing 
them their choice of Sunday schools, confirmation, and careers. 
Playtime with the children was an essential part of holidays and 
weekends. Before Bollingen there was a vacation island on the 
upper end of Lake Zürich where natural living was the mode. They 
lived in tents; firewood came from the forest and water from the 
lake. Creative games were invented around natural objects of 
wood, sand, and stone, or played on boats where “Papa” Jung was 
captain to the childrens’ boatmen. 

Jung loved to work with his hands — painting, chiselling, 
building models of ships — often involving the children’s partici- 
pation while telling them stories that spurred their imagination. 
Hikes in the forest, sailing, cycling, or working in the garden were 
also shared with family and a few close friends. 

Franz Jung, who once described his father as “maddening and 
marvellous” helped him build his retreat at Bollingen. In 1928 the 
Jungs bought their first automobile, a family car they called “Lina,” 
to which Jung added a red two-seater sports car. 


Jung’s first auto, c. 1928. 


106 CARL JUNG WOUNDED HEALER OF THE SOUL 


Jung in his stuay 


hetograph by Karsh of 


Jung's book-lined study 
was notable for images 
Irom many different 
cultures, East and West, 
ncluding Christian 
Stained glass windows. 
This was his place of 
work, while Bollingen 
remained his preferred 
place of inner repose. 


PaeT Two: HEALER 


Reminiscences 


ELIZABETH SHEPLEY SERGEANT — | 
had seen him often as a highly 
civilized modernist driving a 
red Chrysler through the twist- 
ing streets of Ziirich; pondering 
the problems of the psyche in 
his sober booklined study with 
its Oriental paintings and 
Christian stained glass ... 
before | came upon the primi- 
tive Jung, one rainy summer 
day, outside his favorite 
dwelling place [Bollingen] — a 
grey stronghold, of medieval 
outline, standing alone and 
apart, surrounded by hills and 
water — where, when his work 
as a doctor is over, he retires to 
become for a season the 
detached scholar and writer 
who turns experience into 
theory. Ensconced there in the 
shelter of the round stone 
tower which he had built with 
his own hands, dressed in a 
bright blue linen overall, with 
his powerful arms in a tub of 
water, ! beheld Dr. Jung earnestly engaged in washing his 
blue jeans.... 

Dr. Jung never does anything by halves. When he walks 
up and down the floor of the Psychological Club, expound- 
ing a dream to his advanced students, every cell and fiber of 
his physical being seems to participate; every resource of 
his great learning . . . and his native wisdom is turned in a 
single living stream upon the question in hand. This mas- 
sive, peaceful man in blue was putting the same zest and 
interest into washing. No part of Jung was left in Küsnacht 
giving consultations.9 


BARBARA HANNAH — Toni paid back hospitality by asking Jung 
to invite me to Bollingen. | was frankly terrified when | first 


REMINISENCES 


107 


Illustration from the Mutus 
Liber (Mutable Book), La 
Rochelle, 1677. 


A couple kneels in prayer. 
He is an alchemist; she is 
the soror mystica (sister in 
the mystery). Like “an old 
alchemist,” Jung, in his 
Bollingen kitchen, 
concocted elaborate 
dishes from a variety of 
ingredients. His guests 
often felt a touch of 
magic about their visit. 


arrived at the Tower. It was very cold weather and Jung was 
cooking in his original round kitchen in a long Oriental robe 
which he often wore in cold weather. He looked like a pic- 
ture I had once seen of an old alchemist at work among his 
retorts. He looked more whole than ever... . Toni, who was 
also staying there, just gave me some tea and told me to 
take a chair by the fire and watch Jung cook, then busied 
herself with fetching the things he asked for and her own 
jobs. Jung was entirely engrossed in some absorbing cook- 
ing and in watching the fire. (He was a most unusually good 
cook and used in those days to cook the most complicated 
dishes. | remember one sauce with no fewer than sixteen 
ingredients!) | did not yet know him well enough to feel it as 
a companionable silence (which | learned later to enjoy 
more than anything), so after two or three hours | took an 
opportunity, when he did not seem quite so engrossed, to 
murmur: “I am scared stiff.” Although only a faint amused 
smile indicated that he had even heard my remark, the ice 
was broken and | began to feel at home. After a bit he gave 
me an aperitif... then | even got a small job or two to do, 
and finally we were ready to sit down at the round table. 
The marvelous food and wine rapidly banished my fear, 
though | was fortunate enough still to say nothing, except 
for a few appreciative gruntlike murmurs while we were 
eating. That was indeed fortunate because, as | learned lat- 
er, Jung hated to talk while he was eating a really good meal. 
(He used to quote his mother, who said that chattering was 
disrespectful to good food.) The only remark | remember 
him making during that first meal was: “Oh, well, you 


108 CARL JUNG WOUNDED HEALER OF THE SOUL 


PART Two: HEALER 


already know how to enjoy your food, that is one thing 
(emphasis on the one!) | shall not have to teach you!”®1 


CHOREOGRAPHER AND POET HELENA HENDERSON — | remember 
the damp, stony, medieval look and smell of the house, and 
Dr. Jung sitting by the fireplace with a stocking cap on his 
head, stirring a stew in a big iron pot. We ate the stew later 
at a refectory table in another stone-floored room. Dr. Jung 
gave us a lot of wine and made us all quite drunk in a pleas- 
ant way, and all 1 remember is everyone telling jokes, but 
not what they were. Only when we had finished our second 
helping of stew, and might have been ready for another, he 
asked us to guess what a certain kind of meat in it could be. 
We guessed heart, lungs and all kinds of unusual things, and 
finally had to give up. He then revealed that it was dried 
cow's udder, and after that no one seemed to want any 
more. Great joke! He threw the rest to the dogs under the 
table — another medieval gesture. 

| remember driving back in a haze of wine and enjoy- 
ment. | remember, but find it hard to convey, the fairytale 
quality of the place and everything that happened there. 
Above all | remember someone who, by his every word and 
action, gave one the feeling that life is a good thing — 
something even more precious to me than anything he put 
on paper.9? 


ANIELA JAFFE — Jung gave free rein to his emotions, both pos- 
itive and negative, with his friends and in daily life. In his 
younger years his laughter rang out far and wide like a fan- 
fare. Once there approached on the terrace . .. where the 
Eranos meetings were held every year... an amiable 
stranger, no longer young, whom none of the participants 
knew. He excused himself for intruding and explained why 
he had come: he wanted to meet the man who was laugh- 
ing so heartily and uproariously that he, walking alone on 
the road... high above Casa Eranos, had irresistibly been 
infected by it. Naturally Jung was enchanted and instantly 
engaged the stranger in conversation.9? 


From their inception in 1933, Jung played a leading role in the 
international and multidisciplinary Eranos Conferences, where for 
nearly two decades he launched his new ideas. Jung’s theories were 
beginning to be applied to widely divergent disciplines — theolo- 
gy, political science, jurisprudence, and literature. Hermann Hesse 


REMINISENCES 109 


adopted Jung’s ideas in several novels; so did H. G. Wells, who 
acknowledged his thinking as “a bright light in my darkness and a 
gold mine for reflection.” Jung himself wrote essays on poetry, lit- 
erature, and art, including the work of James Joyce and Picasso. 
Public life also brought a series of lecture tours and honorary doc- 
torates in European, American, English, and Indian universities, as 
well ‘as the city of Zürich's Prize for Literature. 


JANE WHEELWRIGHT — Observing him in Zürich, surrounded 
by people, it was nevertheless clear he was going it alone. 
He contained the others, but there was no one to contain 
him. 


Yet Jung confessed in a letter in 1932, 


| have attacks of feeling horribly inferior. | have to digest a 
whole span of life full of mistakes and stupidity. Anyway 
feelings of inferiority are the counterpart of power. Wanting 
to be better or more intelligent than one is, is power too. It 
is difficult enough to be what one is and yet endure oneself 
and for once forgive one’s own sins with Christian charity. 
That is damnably difficult. 


Foundation stone, Ascona, Switzerland. 


Olga Fróbe-Kapteyn, founder of the 
Eranos Conferences in Lake Maggiore, 
erected this stone in homage to 

the Unknown Spirit of the center. 

The conferences were begun "to 
receive the secret of the spirit with 
reverence. ...” (Jahre Franos) 


110 CARL JUNG WOUNDED HEALER OF THE SOUL 


lung with Mathias 
Heinrich Göring, head of 
the German Medical 


Society for Psychotherapy 
in 1934 

lung had accepted the 
post of Vice President and 
later the presidency of the 
International General 


Medical Society. 


Pant: Two: HEALER 


Strife 


| 

"Tie highly charged years leading 
up to World War II fanned one of the 
public controversies that punctuated 
Jung's life. It included recurring 
accusations of anti-Semitism and 
pro-Nazi leanings, which are occa- 
sionally echoed even today. 

In the early 1930s Jung, like 
many others, saw political events in 
Germany as "uncertain" in outcome, 
with some possibility of a positive 
result from the upheaval. It was a 
view he held for about two years. In 
1933, at the urgent request of its 
leading members, Vice President 
Jung accepted the vacant presidency 
of the General Medical Society for 

= Psychotherapy and editorship of its 

publication, the Zentralblatt, both 
located in Germany. This was at a time when Hitler had just come 
to power and all German institutions stood in danger of being 
forced to ^conform" to Nazi ideology. 

Although the Society was international in membership it was 
dominated by Germans and included many Jews. As a Swiss citi- 
zen, Jung could act independently, and did. Within months he 
rewrote the constitution to enlarge the organization into the Inter- 
national General Society for Psychotherapy, which included a 
series of national groups with voting rights, thereby precluding any 
one section having control. It also allowed for individual member- 
ship for people not wishing, or unable, to be affiliated with a 
national group, thus protecting the Jews. Letters show he then 
sought Swiss, Danish, Swedish, and Dutch help. 


Dear Colleague. . . . 


By means of this organization | am trying to prevent the 
special political currents in the German group, which is 
numerically the strongest, from spilling over into the Society 
as a whole. This is what many foreigners fear, particularly 
the Jews, who as you know are very numerous. If we suc- 
ceed in organizing some national groups in neutral coun- 
tries, this will act as a counterweight and at the same time 


STRIFE 


afford the Germans a much needed opportunity to main- 
tain a connection with the outside world in their present 
spiritual isolation. This connection is essential for the con- 
tinued development of psychotherapy in Germany. . . .56 


The separate German section was "conformed" with Professor 
Góering, cousin of the Reichmarshall, as its president. But it was 
the first issue of the Society's periodical under Jung’s name as edi- 
tor that really ignited the controversy. Jung had agreed to a previ- 
ously planned special supplement of the Zentralblatt for circulation 
in Germany only. Signed by Góering, the special edition obliged 
German society members to adopt Hitler's political and ideological 
principles. By negligence, mistake, or design Góering's Manifesto 
also appeared in the international Zentralblatt without Jung's 
knowledge and against his orders to its managing editor, Dr. Wal- 


ter Cimbal, in Germany. 


Dear Colleague. ... 


|... take this opportunity of informing you that the fact that 
Góering's Manifesto, which should have appeared only in 
the special German issue, has nevertheless come out in the 
Zentralblatt has displeased me. As you will remember, I told 
you of my express wish that the German issue should be 
signed by Prof. Góering. | as a foreigner do not fit into Ger- 
man internal politics. Also, with regard to foreign sub- 
scribers, it is a regrettable tactical blunder when purely 
domestic political manifestos, which can at a pinch be 
taken as German necessities, are rammed down the throats 
of foreign readers who are critical enough as it is.... I 
would... urgently request you to make the Zentralblatt 
intended for foreign circulation unpolitical in every respect, 
otherwise it is quite impossible for foreign subscribers to 
join the Society. . . . 

The Zentralblatt blunder has already set off a campaign 
against me in Zürich ... as President of the International 
Society | must make absolutely sure that the periodical 
under my direction maintains a scientific form outside all 
politics.97 


The same edition carried an editorial by Jung on differences 


between Jewish and German psychology. 


112 


| would like to state expressly that this is not meant to sug- 
gest any depreciation of Semitic psychology, any more than 


CARL JUNG 


WOUNDED HEALER OF THE SOU! 


Set Design for Queen of 
the Night rom The Magic 
Hute) 

Aquatint by Karl Friedrich 
Schinkel, Germany, 1819. 
By 1933, the dark night 

of the Third Reich had . 
enveloped Germany. All 


institutions were under 
the tight control of the 


state. 


Part Two: HEALER 


Li 
* 
* 
" 
» 
» 
* 
* 
» 
* 
> 
n 


a depreciation of that of the Chinese is intended when 
speaking of the characteristic psychology of the Far Fast.59 


An avalanche of public attacks, opened by Dr. Bally in Switzer- 


I found myself faced with a moral conflict... should I as a 
prudent neutral withdraw on this side of the frontier, live 
and wash my hands in innocence or should | — as | was well 
aware — lay myself open to attack and the unavoidable mis- 
understanding which no one can escape who, out of a high- 
er necessity, has to come to terms with the political powers 
that be in Germany? Should | sacrifice the interests of sci- 
ence, of loyalty to my colleagues, of the friendship which 
binds me to many German physicians, and the living com- 
munity of German language and intellectual culture, to my 
egotistic comfort and different political outlook? .. . So | 
had no alternative but to lend the weight of my name and of 
my independent position for the henefit af mv friande 


Crom 


land, accused Jung of anti-Semitism and Nazi sympathies. Jung 
stated his position in two articles. 


1123 


The main point is to get a 
young and insecure science 
into a position of safety during 
an earthquake. ... Medicine 
has nothing to do with politics 
...and therefore it can and 
should be practiced for the 
good of suffering humanity 
under all governments.... 
Man after all still has a soul and 
is not just an ox fatted for polit- 
ical slaughter. If | am called 
into the arena for the sake of 
the soul I shall follow the call 
wherever it may be.... The 
doctor who, in wartime, gives 
his help to the wounded of the 
other side will surely not be 
held a traitor to his country. . . . 

Admittedly I was incautious 
... as to do the very thing most 
open to misunderstanding at 
the present moment: I tabled 
the Jewish question . . . may it 
not be asked wherein lie the 
peculiar differences between 
Jewish and an essentially 
Christian outlook? If | were in a 
position — as Dr. Bally supposes me to be — of not being 
able to point out a single difference between the two psy- 
chologies, it would amount to exactly the same thing as not 
being able to make plausible the difference between the 
peculiarities of the English and the Americans, or the French 
and the Germans. . . . All branches of mankind unite in one 
stem, yes, but what is a stem without separate branches? 

I have no hesitation in admitting that it is a highly unfor- 
tunate and confusing coincidence that my scientific pro- 
gramme should have been superimposed without my 
co-operation and against my express wish, on a political 
manifesto.9? 


The Jew, etc. 


Oil and charcoal by R. B. 
Kitaj, 1976 (unfinished). 
Although a "neutral" 
Swiss, Jung was con- 
fronted with a moral 
dilemma by the rise of 
Nazism: Should he with- 
draw to a safe distance, 
or do what he could for 
international psychiatry 
and its members in spite 
of Hitler's Germany? 


Inevitably, the old break with Freud was resurrected, now 
viewed with racist overtones. In addition, some of Jung's state- 
ments on Jewish culture were seen to echo the general limited 


114 CARL JUNG WOUNDED HEALER OF THE SOUL 


Funeral 


Woodcut by Solomon 
Yudovin, 1926. 


The mass hysteria of the 
1930s and 1940s would 
soon lead twenty million 
people, six million of 
them Jews, to their doom, 
and convulse the entire 
world in war. It would take 
an atomic explosion, a 
new manifestation of 

the shadow, to end the 
collective insanity. 


E Miss do SS CE 
= er, 


= E 


knowledge of it at the time by both gentiles and many Jews. Freud 
himself, for instance, had once declared himself unaware of any 
Jewish mystic tradition. Jung’s letters give the tenor of the times: 


13th April 1934 

Dear Frau von Speyer, 

| have fallen foul of contemporary history. ... People now 
think | am a blood-boltered anti-Semite because | have 
helped the German doctors to consolidate their Psy- 
chotherapeutic Society and because | have said there are 
certain differences between Jewish and so-called Aryan 
psychology which are mainly due to the fact that the Jews 
have a cultural history that is 2000 years older than the so- 
called Aryan. There has been a terrific shindy over this. It is 
no pleasure to be well known. You are then like a city on a 
mountain and cannot remain hidden.” 


Dear Dr. Cohen, 


I would like to thank you for your understanding and decent 
article in the /sraelitisches Wochenblatt. Such an event at a 


PART Two: HEALER STRIFE 115 


time like this, when stupidity is celebrating veritable orgies, 
is a rarity. 

Your criticism of my lack of knowledge in things Jewish 
is quite justified. | don’t understand Hebrew. But you seem 
to impute a political attitude to me which in reality | do not 
possess. | am absolutely not an opponent of the Jews even 
though I am an opponent of Freud's. | criticize him because 
of his materialistic and intellectualistic and — last but not 
least — irreligious attitude and not because he is a Jew... . 

My relation with Germany is very recent and is due to 
idiotic altruism and not at all to political sentiment.” 


My dear Kirsch. . . . 


You ought to know me sufficiently well to realize that 
an unindividual stupidity like anti-Semitism cannot be laid 
at my door. You know well enough how very much I take 
the human being as a personality and how | continually 
endeavor to lift him out of his collective condition and 
make him an individual. This, as you know, is possible only 
if he acknowledges his peculiarity which has been forced 
on him by fate. No one who is a Jew can become a human 
being without knowing that he is a Jew, since this is the basis 
from which he can reach out towards a higher humanity. 
This holds good for all nations and races. Nationalism — 
disagreeable as it is — is therefore a sine qua non, but the 
individual must not remain stuck in it. . . ."? 


My dear Murray. . . . 


| don't think that I have paranoic delusions about persecu- 
tion. The difficulty is very real. Whatever ! touch and wher- 
ever I go | meet with this prejudice that I’m a Nazi and that 
I'm in close affiliation with the German government. | had 
very real proof of this and corresponding difficulties this 
summer in England. Even in India I discovered that a faked 
photograph with my name had been sent to scientific soci- 
eties . . . from Vienna. On this photo, which I possess, I’m 
represented as a Jew of the particularly vicious kind. Such 
experiences are no delusions.” 


Letters, publications, and statements by prominent Jewish sup- 
porters now show that Jung in the 1930s and 40s helped countless 
individual Jews with advice and assistance to safety in England 
and America. As well as offering active support professionally, 
Jung included an essay by a Jewish author in one of his own books 


116 CARL JUNG WOUNDED HEALER OF THE SOUL 


Part Two: HEALER 


and wrote a foreword to a book by his Jewish pupil Gerhard Adler. 
Nonetheless, there is criticism of the timing and accuracy of his 
remarks on Jewish psychology and culture in a period of racial 
fanaticism on one side and hypersensitivity and danger to life on 
the other. 

Jung also staunchly supported the speaking rights of Jewish 
members of the Society against German pressure, and finally 
resigned in 1939 because he couldn’t get a guarantee from the Ger- 
man section and its new allies that the organization would contin- 
ue without discrimination on “so-called Aryan” lines. By that time, 
Jung had walked out of a summoned meeting in Goebbel's office 
and later made increasingly hostile statements about the Nazi 
regime. In a letter, he wrote, ^On account of my critical utterances I 
was ‘marked down’ by the Gestapo, my books were banned in Ger- 
many and in France they were for the most part destroyed."7^ At 
one point, when his name was discovered on the Nazi blacklist, he 
had to make a sudden exit from his Zürich home to safety in the 
mountains on the advice of top Swiss Army authorities." 


28th September 1939 
Dear Dr. Harding. . . . 


We naturally hope not to be implicated in the war, but there 
is only one conviction in Switzerland, that if it has to be, it 
will be on the side of the Allies. There is no doubt and no 
hesitation; the unanimous conviction in Switzerland is that 
Germany has lost her national honor to an unspeakable 
degree, and the Germans in as much as they still think know 
it too. . . .7 


Five days before that letter was written, Freud died in exile in 
London. Two years before, his safe arrival in England from Nazi 
Vienna prompted a telegram of congratulations from Jung, the only 
personal contact between the two men since their break. Friends of 
both Freud and Jung have testified that neither man ever fully 
healed the wounded feelings of that friendship's end. 


STRIFE 117 


Indian Summer 


Betore the war hit there was an Indian summer, literally, for Jung 
— the last of his cultural expeditions, this one at the invitation of 
the British Indian Government in 1937. He had already published a 
psychological commentary on The Tibetan Book of the Dead, had 
given the Terry Lectures at Yale University on “Psychology and 
Religion,” and had “read a great deal about Indian philosophy and 
religious history,” which left him “deeply convinced of the value of 
Oriental wisdom.” 


In India I was principally concerned with the question of the 
psychological nature of evil. | had been very much im- 
pressed by the way this problem is integrated in Indian spir- 
itual life... . 

I saw that Indian spirituality contains as much of evil as 
of good. The Christian strives for good and succumbs to 
evil; the Indian feels himself to be outside good and evil, 
and seeks to realize this state by meditation or yoga. My 
objection is that, given such an attitude, neither good nor 
evil takes on any real outline, and this produces a certain 
stasis. One does not really believe in evil, and one does not 
really believe in good. ... 

The Indian's goal is not moral perfection, but the condi- 
tion of nirvana [liberation from the opposites and the ten 
thousand things]. He wishes to free himself from nature; in 
keeping with this aim, he seeks in meditation the condition 
of imagelessness and emptiness. I, on the other hand, wish 
to persist in the state of lively contemplation of nature and 
of the psychic images. | want to be freed neither from 
human beings, nor from myself, nor from nature; for all 
these appear to me the greatest of miracles. Nature, the 
psyche, and life appear to me like divinity unfolded — and 
what more could I wish for? To me the supreme meaning of 
Being can consist only in the fact that it is, not that it is not 
or is no longer... . 

Real liberation becomes possible for me only when | 


have done all that | was able to do. .. . If | withdraw from 
participation, | am virtually amputating the corresponding 
part of my psyche. ... 


A man who has not passed through the inferno of his 
passions has never overcome them. . .. Whenever we give 
up, leave behind, and forget too much, there is always the 


118 CARL JUNG 


WOUNDED HEALER OF THE SOUL 


Devi Drinking from a Skull 
Cup 

Painting, Punjab, India, 

c. 1660-1670. 
Aseventeenth-century 
devotional shows 
opposite forms of the 
goddess: blessed. Lakshmi 
attended by darkly terrify- 
ing Kali. On the back of 
the image is written in 
Sanskrit, “One should 
meditate . . . in the lotus 
of Lakshmi's heart on... 
[the] goddess of remem- 
brance.” For the Hindu, 
the goddesses are not in 
opposition, for they both 
serve the Godhead. 


Part Two: HEALER 


danger that the things we have neglected will return with 
added force.”” 


Jung observed that in “the dreamlike world of India life has not 
withdrawn into the capsule of the head. It is still the whole body 
that lives.” On a visit to the Black Pagoda of Konarak he encoun- 
tered the way India includes sexuality in its religion in a manner 
quite foreign to the West. 


The pagoda is covered from base to pinnacle with exquis- 
itely obscene sculptures . . . which he [a pandit] explained 
to me as a means to achieve spiritualization. | objected — 
pointing to a group of young peasants who were standing 
open-mouthed before the monument admiring these 
splendors — that such young men were scarcely undergo- 
ing spiritualization at the moment, but were much more 


INDIAN SUMMER 119 


120 


likely having their heads filled with sexual fantasies. Where- 
upon he replied, “But that is just the point. How can they 
ever become spiritualized if they do not first fulfill their 
karma? These admittedly obscene images are here for the 
very purpose of recalling to the people their dharma [law]; 
otherwise these unconscious fellows might forget it.””8 


If you want to learn the greatest lesson India can teach you, 
wrap yourself in the cloak of your moral superiority, go to 
the Black Pagoda of Konarak, sit down in the shadow of the 
mighty ruin that is still covered with the most amazing col- 
lection of obscenities, read Murray's cunning Handbook of 
India, which tells you how to be properly shocked by this 


CARL JUNG 


Carved stone frieze, Devi 
Jagadambü Temple, India, 
c. 1600. 


Sexual ecstasy is 
portrayed in sculpture 
on the "heaven bands" of 
the temple at Khajuraho 
to remind us of dharma 
(law) and lead us to 
enlightenment. 


WOUNDED HEALER OF THE SOUL 


The Alchemist 


Detail of manuscript page 
from Salomon Trismosin, 
Splendor Solis, 1582. 
The philosopher 

carries the healing vessel 
to save the world 
(salvator mundi). 


Part Two: HEALER 


lamentable state of affairs . . . and then 
analyze carefully and with the utmost 
honesty all your reactions, feelings, 
and thoughts. It will take you quite a 
while, but in the end... you will have 
learned something about yourself, and 
about the white man in general, which 
you have probably never heard of 
from anyone else...a trip to India is 
on the whole most edifying and, from 
a psychological point of view, most 
advisable, although it may give you 
considerable headaches.7? 


While in this "alien, highly differentiated 
culture" Jung had one of his characteristic big 
dreams that revealed a sense of direction for 
him. The dreamer found himself with a num- 
ber of Zürich friends on an island off the coast 
of southern England. Before them was a castle 
dimly lit by candles, which he recognized as 
the home of the Holy Grail. But the Grail 
wasn't there yet. Jung knew it was their task 
to bring the Grail to the castle from the small, 
uninhabited, and solitary house on the island 
where it was hidden. Next he found himself 
on the shoreline of a deserted, desolate area. 
With neither bridge nor boat to be seen he 
realized he would have to swim across alone 
to fetch the Grail. 


Imperiously, the dream wiped away all the intense impres- 
sions of India and swept me back to the too-long-neglect- 
ed concerns of the Occident, which had formerly been 
expressed in the quest for the Holy Grail as well as the 
search for the philosopher's stone. | was taken out of the 
world of India, and reminded that India was not my task, 
but only a part of the way — admittedly a significant one — 
which should carry me closer to my goal. It was as though 
the dream were asking me, "What are you doing in India? 
Rather seek for yourself and your fellows the healing vessel, 
the salvator mundi, which you urgently need. For your state 
is perilous; you are all in imminent danger of destroying all 


that centuries have built up.”8° 


INDIAN SUMMER 


121 


Part Three 
OF THE SOUL 


Lei | m 


Floret pute, A 


d. tes 
prise vs 


Seed 


Painting by Francesco Clemente, 1990. 


It is quite possible that we look at the world from the wrong side and that we might 
find the right answer by changing our point of view and looking at it from the other 
side, that is, not from outside, but from inside." 


124 CARL JUNG WOUNDED HEALER OF THE SOUL 


OVERLEAF Vision S 

Apparition 

Painting by Odilon Redon, 

1910. ung used the war years in neutral Switzerland to further his 
alchemical and religious studies. If isolation from the international 
scene and rationing of food and gasoline kept outer life curtailed, 
inner experience deepened. 


One night I awoke and saw, bathed in bright light at the foot 
of my bed, the figure of Christ on the Cross. It was not quite 
life-size, but extremely distinct; and I saw that his body was 
made of greenish gold. The vision was marvelously beauti- 
ful, and yet I was profoundly shaken by it... . 

The green gold is the living quality 
which the alchemists saw not only in 
man but also in inorganic nature. It is 
an expression of the life-spirit ... the 
Anthropos who animates the whole 
cosmos. . . . This spirit has poured him- 
self out into everything, even into inor- 
ganic matter; he is present in metal and 
stone. My vision was thus a union of 
the Christ-image with his analogue in 
matter, the filius macrocosmi.? 


Jung told Barbara Hannah of another 
unsettling experience. . 


When news of the unholy alliance of 
Germany with Russia burst upon a 
horrified Europe, Jung was further 
disturbed by a most indigestible dream 
,.. that Hitler was “the devil's Christ,” 
the anti-Christ, but that nevertheless, 
as such, he was the instrument of God. 
He told me it took him a long time and 
Green Death much effort before he was able to 
Painting by Odilon Redon accept this idea.? 

According to Jung That added to a "visionary dream" which had haunted him 
green gold is the color since 1918 following the peace declaration of World War I. 


that the alchemists saw as 


an expression of the life 


was returning to Switzerland from a trip in Germany. My 


spirit permeating man Á 
vody was covered with burns and my clothes were burnt 


and matter 


l'^* THREE: OF THE SOUL: VISIONS 125 


To Peter Bayne, his close friend in England, 
Jung wrote in 1940, 


full of holes, for | had seen fire falling 
like rain from heaven and consuming 
the cities of Germany. I had an intima- 
tion that the crucial year would be 
1940.4 


My Dear Peter, 


This is the fateful year for which | have 
waited more than twenty-five years. | did 
not know that it was such a disaster. 
Although since 1918 | knew that a terrible fire would spread 
over Europe beginning in the North East, | have no vision 
beyond 1940 concerning the fate of Europe. This year 
reminds me of the enormous earthquake in 26 B.C. that 
shook down the great temple of Karnak. It was the prelude 
to the destruction of all temples, because a new time had 
begun. 1940 is the year when we approach the meridian of 
the first star in Aquarius. It is the premonitory earthquake of 
the New Age. ... 

It is difficult to be old in these days. One is helpless. 
On the other hand one feels happily estranged from this 
world. | like nature but not the world of man or the world 
to be.... 

In autumn I resume my lectures . . . about the individu- 
ation process in the Middle Ages! That's the only thing with 
me one could call up to date. I loathe the new style, the new 
Art, the new Music, Literature, Politics, and above all the 
new Man. It's the old beast that has not changed since the 
troglodytes. 

My dear Peter, | am with you and with old England!’ 


Woodcut of the comet 
of 1299 from Liber 
Chronicarum mundi, 
Nuremberg, 1493. 


Jung experienced dreams 
of cataclysm. After the 
end of World War I, he 
had prescient intimations 
of the impending crises 
that would explode by 
1940, as the world entered 
the Age of Aquarius. 


In 1944 Jung, aged sixty-nine, had a heart attack which kept him 
at death's door for several weeks while his interior life produced a 
series of visions. 


It seemed to me that I was high up in space. Far below I saw 
the globe of the earth, bathed in a gloriously blue light. | 
saw the deep blue sea and the continents. . . . 

The sight of the earth from this height was the most 
glorious thing | had ever seen. 


126 CARL JUNG WOUNDED HEALER OF THE SOUL 


Seated Jain Tirthankara 


Marble, India, eleventh 
century. 


Following a severe heart 
attack at the age of sixty- 
nine, Jung’s interior life 
became even more vivid. 
In one of a series of 
visions, he encountered a 
seated yogi in meditation, 
who pointed the way to 
self-knowledge. 


THREE: OF THE SOUL 


After contemplating it for a while, | turned around. . . . A 
short distance away I saw in space a tremendous dark block 
of stone, like a meteorite. It was about the size of my house, 
or even bigger. It was floating in space, and 1 myself was 
floating in space. . . . 

An entrance led into a small antechamber. To the right of 
the entrance, a black Hindu sat silently in lotus posture 
upon a stone bench. He wore a white gown, and I knew that 
he expected me. ... 

As | approached the steps leading up to the entrance into 
the rock, a strange thing happened: | had the feeling that 
everything was being sloughed away; everything | aimed at 
or wished for or thought, the whole phantasmagoria of 


VISIONS 


127 


earthly existence, fell away or was stripped from me — an 
extremely painful process. Nevertheless something 
remained; it was as if | now carried along with me every- 
thing | had ever experienced or done, everything that had 
happened around me. I might also say: it was with me, and 
I was it.... 

This experience gave me a feeling of extreme poverty, 
but at the same time of great fullness. There was no longer 
anything | wanted or desired. | existed in an objective form; 
I was what I had been and lived. At first the sense of annihi- 
lation predominated, of having been stripped or pillaged; 
but suddenly that became of no consequence. .. . 

Something else engaged my attention: as | approached 
the temple 1 had the certainty that | was about to enter an 
illuminated room and would meet there all those people to 
whom | belong in reality. There | would at last understand 
— this too was a certainty — what historical nexus | or my 
life fitted into. | would know what had been before me, why 
| had come into being, and where my life was flowing. My 
life as I lived it had often seemed to me like a story that has 
no beginning and no end . . . many questions had remained 
unanswered. Why had it taken this course? Why had I 
brought these particular assumptions with me? What had | 
made of them? What will follow? | felt sure that | would 
receive an answer to all these questions as soon as | entered 
the rock temple. ... 

While I was thinking over these matters... from the 
direction of Europe, an image floated up. It was my doctor, 
Dr. H. — or, rather his likeness — framed by a golden chain 
or a golden laurel wreath. I knew at once... "he is coming 
in his primal form. . . .” 

As he' stood before me, a mute exchange of thought 
took place between us. Dr. H. had been delegated by the 
earth to deliver a message to me, to tell me that there was a 
protest against my going away. I had no right to leave the 
earth and must return. The moment I heard that, the vision 
ceased. 

I was profoundly disappointed, for now it all seemed to 
have been for nothing. . . . 

In reality, a good three weeks were still to pass before | 
could truly make up my mind to live again. | could not eat 
because all food repelled me. . . . Life and the whole world 
struck me as a prison. . . . 

During those weeks I lived in a strange rhythm. By day I 
was usually depressed. . . . Gloomily, | thought, "Now I must 


128 CARL JUNG WOUNDED HEALER OF THE SOUL 


The Accused 


Charcoal on paper by 
Odilon Redon, 1886. 
After his brush with 
death in 1944, Jung was 
slow to recover. “I could 
not eat... life and the 
whole world struck me 
as a prison." 


PaRT THREE: OF THE SOUL 


go back to this drab world." Toward evening | would fall 
asleep, and my sleep would last until about midnight. Then 
| would come to myself and lie awake for about an hour, 
but in an utterly transformed state. It was as if | were in an 
ecstasy. I felt as though | were floating in space, as though | 
were safe in the womb of the universe — in a tremendous 
void, but filled with the highest possible feeling of happi- 
ness. “This is eternal bliss," | thought. “This cannot be 
described; it is far too wonderful!” 

Everything around me seemed enchanted. ... | myself 
was, so it seemed, in the ... garden of pomegranates, and 
the wedding of Tifereth with Malchuth was taking place. Or 
else | was Rabbi Simon ben Jochai, whose wedding in the 


VISIONS 


129 


130 


afterlife was being celebrated. It was the mystic marriage as 
it appears in the Cabbalistic tradition. . . . At bottom it was | 
myself: | was the marriage. . . . 

Gradually the garden of pomegranates faded away and 
changed. There followed the Marriage of the Lamb, in a 
Jerusalem festively bedecked.... There were ineffable 
states of joy. Angels were present, and light. | myself was the 
“Marriage of the Lamb.” 

That, too, vanished, and there came a new image, the 
last vision. | walked up a wide valley to the end . . . a classi- 
cal amphitheater.. . magnificently situated in the green 
landscape. And there, in this theater, the hierosgamos was 
being celebrated. Men and women dancers came onstage, 
and upon a flower-decked couch All-father Zeus and Hera 
consummated the mystic marriage, as it is described in the 
Iliad. 

All these experiences were glorious . . . so fantastically 
beautiful that by comparison this world appeared down- 
right ridiculous. As | approached closer to life again, they 
grew fainter, and scarcely three weeks after the first vision 
they ceased altogether. . . . 

We shy away from the word "eternal," but | can describe 
the experience only as the ecstasy of a non-temporal state 
in which present, past, and future are one. Everything that 


Sandpainting of Navajo 
cosmic couple, used in 
the Shooting Chant. 


A Navajo Indian version 
of the hierosgamos, the 
mystic wedding. Here the 
Sky is united with earth, 
helping to keep the world 
in balance. Navajo sand- 
painting was used by 
shamans in traditional 
chants to heal both 
bodies and spirits. 


WounDED HEALER OF THE SOUL 


happens in time had been brought together into a 
concrete whole. Nothing was distributed over time, 
nothing could be measured by temporal concepts. 
The experience might best be defined as a state of 
feeling, but one which cannot be produced by imag- 
ination. ... One is interwoven into an indescribable 
whole and yet observes it with complete objectivity. 


The dissolution of our timebound form in eternity 
brings no loss of meaning. Rather does the little fin- 
ger know itself a member of the hand.” 


As Barbara Hannah recounts: 


There was also a vision or experience — not men- 
tioned in Memories — which he described to Emma 
Jung and myself very vividly, when 1 visited him in the 
hospital during his early convalescence . . . he told us 


Wandjina Aboriginal then that as he was recovering from the very worst of his ill- 
Vustralian rock art ness, he felt that his body had been dismembered and cut 
This is one of the up into small pieces. Then, over quite a long period, it was 
oldest iconic image: slowly collected and put together again with the greatest 
known to man. Shamans care. This is a very interesting parallel to the widespread 


of indigenous cultures 


primitive rituals that were experienced by shamans or med- 
icine men. There are innumerable such examples all over 
the world, described by Mircea Eliade in his... book on 
renewal, experience inner shamanism. For example, both in Siberia and Australia the 
psychic forces and work candidate for shamanism “is subjected to an operation by 
with them to heal others semi-divine beings or ancestors, in which his body is dis- 
membered and his internal organs and bones are renewed. 
... Very frequently crystals or other symbolic stones are 
introduced into the renewed body. I remember Jung saying 
that day that he had been obliged to do most of or all the 
reassembling himself, so it is interesting that Eliade wrote: 
“The primitive magician, the medicine man or shaman is not 
only a sick man, he is above all a sick man who has been 
cured, who has succeeded in curing himself."? 


worldwide, through an 
arduous journey of 


dismemberment and self 


fur THREE OFTHE SOUL VISIONS 131 


Reminiscences Post-War 


D Day — the beginning of the end of World War II 
arrived while Jung was still in the hospital. 


Our so-called peace is a troubled affair and the greatest 
part of Europe is still in hysterics. No wonder really! 
The mental and moral, social and financial catastro- (1 


phe is simply gigantic. The mental and moral devasta- Svc 


tion is the one I'm chiefly concerned with, since we 
begin now to get more immediate and personal 
acquaintance with the facts of the atrocities of the 
war.... l 

| must say that before the Hitler era I still had some 
illusions which have been radically destroyed by the 
prodigious efforts of the Germans. I really had not thought 
that man could be so absolutely bad. | thought he could 
be evil, but evil has at least a certain character, while evil in 
Germany was rotten. It was a carrion of evil, unimaginably 
worse than the normal devil. Since Germany is not on the 
moon, | have drawn my conclusions for the rest of 
mankind.? 


dinner in honor of Winston Churchill. 


In 1946, Jung was invited by the University of Zürich to a Fr 


22nd September, 1946 


Permit me to thank you and the University once again for 
the invitation to Winston Churchill’s reception and quite 
particularly for the honor of seating me next to the illustri- 
ous guest. Conversation with him, however, made no small 
demands on one’s tact and ingenuity, as | was constantly in 
doubt as to how much question and answer | might expect 
from that very tired man. Nevertheless | thank you for one 
of the most interesting experiences of my life." 


Dear Dr. Jacobi. .. . 


Your news that Churchill was not bored at our table was 
a great relief. Conversation with him was no easy matter 
since he directed his answers mostly to the House of 
Commons.... 


132 CARL JUNG 


Woodcut of a demon, 
medieval. 


As World War II came 
to an end, Jung became 
more aware of the 
devastating evil wreaked 
on Europe by Hitler. He 
felt his illusions of living 
in a civilized world were 
utterly destroyed by 
knowledge of man’s 
apparently bottomless 
inhumanity. 


WOUNDED HEALER OF THE SOUL 


Jung with Mary, daughter 
of Winston Churchill, at 
the Allmendingen Castle 
near Berlin, 1946. 

Itwas Mary Churchill’s 
interest in Jung’s work 
that brought him together 
with her father after the 
war. 


^7" THREE: OF THE SOUL 


P.S. | nearly fell over with astonishment when | discov- 
ered that | had been seated next to Churchill — and at a Uni- 
versity dinner too! “There will be signs and wonders. . . ."!! 


On both occasions when the two men met, it was by Churchill's 
request that they were seated together, largely because of his 
daughter Mary's interest in Jung's work. 

It was in the post-war years that Miss A. I. Allenby first wrote to 
Jung, at a time when she was preparing a thesis on the psychology 
of religion: 


And — without knowing me at all — Jung took the trouble 
to send me an unpublished version of an article of his on 
the Trinity. When | made my first visit to him . . . | was very 
apprehensive — but no sooner had | entered his presence 
than I felt completely at ease. And everyone | have known 
since who met him told me the same story. We talked at 


REMINISCENCES Posr-WAR 


different times about parapsychology — synchronicity — 
the occult — and I would go home in the evening and see 
him sitting there — the chair, his feet, clothes, hands — and 
I would know it was not a memory image but communica- 
tion with reality. . . . You see, he had an uncanny gift of being 
able to talk to the person inside me who refused to come 
out. '? 


As Jung pointed out in letters and statements, it was the devel- 
opment of the internal spiritual self that was the heart of his work. 


You are quite right, the main interest of my work is not con- 
cerned with the treatment of neurosis but rather with the 
approach to the numinous. But the fact is that the approach 
to the numinous is the real therapy and inasmuch as you 
attain to the numinous experiences you are released from 
the curse of pathology. Even the very disease takes on a 
numinous character. 13 


Of all my patients past middle life, that is, past thirty-five, 
there is not one whose ultimate problem is not one of reli- 
gious attitude. Indeed, in the end every one suffered from 
having lost that which living religions of every age have giv- 
en to their believers, and none is really cured who has not 
regained his religious attitude, which naturally has nothing 
to do with creeds or belonging to a church." 


The end of the war brought “a flood of letters,” numerous visi- 
tors, the revival of anti-Semitic accusations, and the foundation of 
the C. G. Jung Institute in Zürich. Theological works, strongly influ- Robert Johnson, 1955. 
enced by Jung’s psychology of religion, began to appear in print Robert Johnson, therapist 


while he himself carried on an extensive correspondence with and author, helped to 
bring Jung's teachings and 


methods to America. 


Catholic and Protestant theologians, as well as Jewish and Eastern 
religious philosophers. 

Author Robert Johnson was then a twenty-seven-year-old stu- 
dent at the Institute and in the early stages of analysis. 


One day... 1 brought one of the great pivotal archetypal 
dreams which have periodically punctuated my life. . . . | 
asked for an hour with Mrs. Jung who was lecturing at the 
Institute and who appealed to me as a gentle, introverted, 
dignified person. . . . 

It seems that Mrs. Jung discussed my dream with Dr. 
Jung that evening for Dr. Jung called the school next day and 


134 CARL JUNG WouNDED HEALER OF THE SOUL 


Kobert Johnson 


lohnson created this 
indala tor tellow 


student and partner 


Helen M. Luke, whose 


signalled intuitively bs 
ing. He was advised by 
nor his d 
e space tor Inner 


ork, and have faith in 


ream 


told me, "Please come out here, | want 
to talk to you”... 

Dr. Jung took me into the garden 
and proceeded to give me a very long 
lecture on the meaning of my dream, 
what it meant to me to have contact in 
this manner with the deep parts of the 
collective unconscious, how | should 
live, what I might expect of my life, what 
I should not attempt, what | could trust, 
what did not belong to me in life. The 
meeting took nearly three hours and it 
was clear that | was to listen and not 
interrupt. Non-directive counselling, 
indeed! Dr. Jung advised me to spend 
most of my time alone, have a separate 
room in the house to be used for noth- 
ing but inner work, never to join any 
organization or collectivity. He indicated that though it was 
true that | was a young man, my dream was of the second 
half of life and was to be lived no matter what age | was. 
When such a dream comes it is to be honored whether the 
time or circumstances are convenient or not. Dr. Jung told 
me that the unconscious would protect me, give me every- 
thing | needed for my life and that my one duty was to do 
my inner work. All else would follow from this.'^ 


Dr. George Hogle was trying to find answers to life while vaca- 


tioning in Zürich after time spent post-war in Germany. On 
impulse he contacted Jung's office to be given an appointment at 
Bollingen. 


After a walk through the woods to what looked like a fairy 
tale castle by the side of the lake, the great wooden door 
was opened to my knock by the huge old hired man, smok- 
ing a pipe and with an axe in his hand. In lame German | 
asked for Herr Doctor, and in idiomatic English he intro- 
duced himself — not the dignified professor | had expected. 
As we stood on the beautiful shore he put me somewhat at 
ease, chatting about his building of his hideaway. My hesi- 
tance and inhibitions were replaced soon after by the con- 
viction that here was a very fallible, rigid old man, as we got 
into an enormously heated argument about the interna- 
tional situation. 


THREE: OF THE SOUL REMINISCENCES PosrT-WAR 135 


Having helped me realize he was quite human and that 
it was quite safe to show some feeling, he escorted me up to 
an elegant Swiss tea which we shared with Emma Jung. They 
enquired at length about the situation in Germany, no 
doubt the reason he was willing to see a non-German com- 
ing recently out of that country. | knew nothing of the con- 
troversy regarding his questionable sympathies for the 
Germans, but certainly at that time | got no impression that 
he had ever been warm in any way toward Nazism, rather 
that he only tried to understand what it all meant at a deep- 
er level. 

Finally we were alone for about an hour, during which 
he dealt graciously and helpfully with my impossible 
enquiry as to what I should do with my life, knowing noth- 
ing about me, and yet no doubt knowing much just by 
observing. Instead of answering my questions he gave me 
other, better questions to ask myself over the succeeding 
months. Most of all as | later mused over the experience of 
being with this extraordinary man, I felt there must be great 
worth and depth in an association with his work. Eleven 
years later |... completed my analytic training in London.!é 


Jung, in his seventies, was beginning to feel the toll of the years 
at many levels. 


1... will soon be seventy-four. . . . | have to tell myself twice 
a day: not too much! Snail’s pace and rests in between and 
a change of snail-horses.... | am like an old car with 


250,000 km. on its back that still can't shake off the memo- 
ry of its twenty horsepower. Nevertheless | console myself 
with the thought that only a fool expects wisdom.'7 


Dear Dr. Oeri.... 


I know what Albert's death must mean to you, for with him 

my last living friend has also departed. We are but a rem- 

nant of the past, more and more so with each coming year. 

Our eyes turn away from the future of the human world in 

which our children, but not ourselves, will live. Enviable the 

lot of those who have crossed the threshold, yet my com- 

passion goes out to those who, in the darkness of the world, 

hemmed in by a narrow horizon and the blindness of igno- 

rance, must follow the river of their days, fulfilling life's task, 

only to see their whole existence, which once was the pre- OPPOSITE 
sent brimming with power and vitality, crumbling bit by bit Jung at Küsnacht. 


136 CARL JUNG WOUNDED HEALER OF THE SOUL 


War 


ERAT. 


Es Pos1 


NISCEN( 


REMI 


F 


PART THREE 


Jung cutting stone at 
Bollingen, c. 1950. 


Jung felt that 

working with stone 
helped connect him to 
his ancestors. 


and crashing into the abyss. This spectacle of old age would 
be unendurable did we not know that our psyche reaches 
into a region held captive neither by change in time nor by 
limitation of place. In that form of being our birth is a death 
and our death a birth. The scales of the whole hang bal- 
anced. With heartfelt sympathy, 


Yours sincerely, C. G. Jung’® 


138 CARL JUNG WouNDED HEALER OF THE SOUL 


A visit to Bollingen by author and painter Maud Oakes produced 
this portrait: 


Jung was a tall, well-built man — slightly stooped due to his 
age. His eyes were keen and penetrating with a twinkle in 
their depth. His mouth was sensitive, humorous, and stub- 
born, and his whole being gave off a feeling of simplicity, of 
wisdom and understanding. Jung was a marvellous racon- 
teur and an equally good listener. To me he was a combina- 
tion of scientist, artist, woodsman, and shaman.!? 


None carved by Jung, 


Bollingen. 

On his seventy-tifth 
birthday, Jung carved an 
alchemical inscription as a 
"thanks offering." 


PART THREE: OF THE SOUI LEMINISCENCFS POST-WAR (30 


In remembrance of his seventy-fifth birthday Jung chiselled a 
twenty-inch square stone with three alchemical inscriptions “as a 
thanks offering.” The stone stands outside the tower at Bollingen 


“and is like an explanation of it.” 


140 


Here stands the mean, uncomely stone, 
‘Tis very cheap in price! 

The more it is despised by fools, 

The more loved by the wise.?? 


When | was working on the stone tablets | became aware of 
the fateful links between me and my ancestors. .. . It has 
always seemed to me that | had to answer questions which 
fate had posed to my forefathers, and which had not yet 
been answered, or as if | had to complete, or perhaps con- 
tinue, things which previous ages had left unfinished.?' 


As there are not only the many but the few, somebody is 
entrusted with the job of looking ahead and talking of the 
things to be. That is partially my job, but | have to be care- 
ful not to destroy the things that are. Nobody will be so 
foolish as to destroy the foundations when he is adding an 
upper story to his house and how can he build it really if the 
foundations are not yet properly laid.?? 


After the illness a fruitful period of work began for me. A 
good many of my principal works were written only then. 
The insight I had had, or the vision of the end of all things, 
gave me the courage to undertake new formulations. | no 
longer attempted to put across my own opinion, but sur- 
rendered myself to the current of my thoughts. Thus one 
problem after the other revealed itself to me and took 
shape.?3 


CARL JUNG 


WOUNDED HEALER OF THE SOUL 


Answer to Job 


Te problem of evil had occupied Jung 
since his childhood, raising, as it does, 
fundamental questions about the ideas of 
God we live with in the form of images, 
concepts, and metaphors and their conse- 
quent effect on the meaning and conduct 
of human existence. Patients and public 
had put these questions to him for years. 
In Aion he began tackling the issue of “the 
dark side of God” but found it needed a 
more direct focus. 

The fateful Answer to Job was foreshad- 
owed by a long dream ending in a scene 
which demonstrated underlying attitudes 
of the dreamer: 


It was a high, circular room with a 
gallery running along the wall, 
from which four bridges led to a 
basin-shaped center. The basin 
rested upon a huge column and 
formed the sultan's round seat. . . . 
The whole was a gigantic man- 
dala.... 

I suddenly saw that from the 
center a steep flight of stairs 


Demon of the Plague 


From Feldbuch der 
Wundarzney, Strassburg, 
1540. 


The question of evil in 

a God-directed universe 
has plagued man's 
understanding for 
millennia. The problem of 
undeserved suffering is 
addressed in the Biblical 
story of Job, the favored 
of God. 


PART THREE: OF THE SOUL 


ascended to a spot high up on the wall....Atthe top of the 
stairs was a small door, and my father said, “Now | will lead 
you into the highest presence." Then he knelt down and 
touched his forehead to the floor. 1 imitated him, likewise 
kneeling, with great emotion. For some reason | could not 
bring my forehead quite down to the floor — there was per- 
haps a millimeter to spare. . . . 

1... ought really to have touched my forehead to the 
floor, so that my submission would be complete. But some- 
thing prevented me from doing so entirely, and kept me just 
a millimeter away. Something in me was saying, “All very 
well, but not entirely." Something in me was defiant and 
determined not to be a dumb fish: and if there were not 
something of the sort in free men, no Book of Job would 
have been written several hundred years before the birth of 


ANSWER TO JOB 


141 


Anthony: “What Is the 
Object of all this?" / 
The Devil: "There is no 
Object." 


Plate XVIII from Tentation 
de Saint-Antoine, the third 
series, 1896. Lithograph by 
Odilon Redon. 

Satan, an angel of God, 


was used by Him to test 
Job. 


Christ. Man always has some mental reservation, even in the 
face of divine decrees. Otherwise, where would be his free- 
dom? And what would be the use of that freedom if it could 
not threaten Him who threatens it? 24 


A fitting approach to Job! But it took a stronger prod from with- 
in "to overcome the greatest inner resistances" and find the courage 
to write a book which he knew would unleash a storm against him. 


If there is anything like the spirit seizing one by the scruff of 
the neck, it was the way this book came into being. . . . 


142 CARLJUNG WOUNDED HEALER OF THE SOUL 


Christ and the Devil 


Engraving by Johann Sadler, 
Paris, 1582. 


Jung's Answer to Job 
offended many by recog- 
nizing "divine darkness," 
the paradox of both good 
and evil being contained 
in God as One. Jung cited 
Clement of Rome, who 
taught that God rules with 
Christ at his right hand 
and the Devil at his left. 


PART THREE: OF THE SOUL 


It came upon me suddenly and unexpectedly during a 
feverish illness. . . . 

It was as if accompanied by the great music of a Bach or 
a Handel. . . . I did not hear anything. | just had the feeling of 
listening to a great composition. . . . | felt its contents as an 
unfolding of the divine consciousness in which | participate 
like it or not. It was reassuring for my inner balance that 1 
made myself conscious of this development.2° 


The story of Job from the Old Testament, dated 600-300 B.C.E., 
confronts us with an ambivalent, contradictory God image. Job, an 
upright man who leads a blameless life according to the law and 
his religion, becomes the victim of a bet between God and his son 
Satan. Would Job stay faithful to God if he lost everything he had — 
his children, herds, health, the goodwill of his wife and friends — 
if he were denied a fair trial by a judge, and ended up with death 
pounding at his door? 

Reeling under the fisticuffs of fate dealt by Satan with God's 
permission, Job angrily debates his case before God, asking: "Why 
me?" He seeks God's help against God, thereby recognizing God's 
divided nature as both "Redeemer" and "Terrible." God thunders. 
Job gives up asking for justice and surrenders as a created being 
subject both to death and the omnipotence of the Creator — "T 
know that my Redeemer lives" — and survives the whole ordeal. 

Jung's Answer to Job meets current 
jenn ». Christian thinking of "privatio boni" 
head on. Christianity sees evil as an 
absence of good, something extrane- 
ous to God for which man is wholly 
responsible. Jung recognizes "the 
divine darkness" revealed in the 
Book of Job and argues good and evil 
as halves of a paradoxical whole, 
both of which are contained in the 
concept of God, an idea long held in 
Eastern religions. 


Psychological experience shows 
that whatever we call “good” 
is balanced by an equally sub- 
stantial "bad" or "evil." If “evil” 
is non-existent, then what- 
ever there is must needs be 
“good.” Dogmatically, neither 


ANSWER TO JOB 143 


“good” nor “evil” can be derived from Man since the “Evil 
One” existed before Man as one of the “Sons of God.” The 
idea of the privatio boni began to play a role in the Church 
only after Mani. 

Before this heresy, Clement of Rome taught that God 
rules with a right and a left hand, the right being Christ, the 
left Satan. Clement's view is clearly monotheistic as it unites 
the opposites in one God. 

Later Christianity, however, is dualistic, inasmuch as it 
splits off one half of the opposites, personified in Satan, and 
he is eternal in his state of damnation. . . . If Christianity 
claims to be a monotheism, it becomes unavoidable to 
assume the opposites as being contained in God.?6 


Many theologians were shocked by this. The German edition 
upset representatives of three religions. Most critics were hostile. 
Jung speaks of "an avalanche of prejudice, misunderstanding, and 
atrocious stupidity." American publishers were afraid to print it for 
a time; when they did, it became an unexpected best-seller, inspir- 
ing people who only knew the Bible by hearsay to turn to it with 
curiosity. The best reactions came from the young; the most enthu- 
siastic letters were sent by simple people. 

Jung had written it, he said, “not as a Biblical scholar but as a 
layman" who nevertheless "spoke in the name of the many" who 
felt the same way. Although he had "no idea of announcing any 
eternal truth" he did hope "to meet with thoughtfulness in the pub- 
lic.” Deep feeling often colors his voice in the book and in the 
intense correspondence that it produced. 

To the Reverend Erastus Evans he wrote, 


Allow me to tell you that | am profoundly grateful to you for 
your most remarkably objective review of my uncouth 
attempt to disturb the obnoxious somnolence of the 
guardians. That is the way in which this damnable little book 
looks to me. ... 

I can assure you | am a moral coward as long as possible. 
As a good little bourgeois citizen, | am lying low and con- 
cealed as deeply as possible, still shocked by the amount of 
the indiscretions I have committed, swearing to myself that 
there would be no more of it because | want peace and 
friendly neighborhood and a good conscience and the sleep 
of the just. Why should I be the unspeakable fool to jump 
into the cauldron? 


144 CARL JUNG 


WOUNDED HEALER OF THE SOUL 


ZU ILE 


Flagellation of Christ a Poon 


Processional banner. 

Tempera on canvas by 
Spinello Aretino, Florence, = 
c. 1395-1400. 


Jung called the nature 
of God the "mystery of 
mysteries." The dual 
aspect of God, encom- 
passing both good and 
evil, is correspondingly 
reflected in man: "as 
above, so below.” 


PART THREE: OF THE SOUL 


>. 
"Nc Ei 
m s E 


Well, | don't want to be melodramatic. This is just for 
your personal information. | have no merit and no proper 
guilt since | got to it “like a dog to a kick,” as we say. And the 
little moral coward | am goes on whining: why should | be 
always the one that collects all available kicks? 


ANSWER TO JOB 


145 


I tell you these things because you have been nice, just, 
and lenient with me. The attribute ^coarse" is mild in com- 
parison to what you feel when God dislocates your hip or 
when he slays the firstborn. ... 

That is one side of my experiences with what is called 
“God.” “Coarse” is too weak a word for it. “Crude,” “violent,” 
“cruel,” “bloody,” “hellish,” “demonic” would be better. That 
I was not downright blasphemous I owe to my domestica- 
tion and polite cowardice. And at each step I felt hindered 
by a beatific vision of which I'd better say nothing.? 


For years he debated vigorously with Catholic and Protestant 
theologians alike, over seventy of them, always asserting that he 
spoke "of the idea or opinion man makes of God to himself,” "the 
God image" and not the nature of God, "the mystery of all myster- 
ies," "Being" beyond thought — always arguing the evolutionary 
relationship between God and man, man and God. 


To FATHER VICTOR WHITE... . 


The crux seems to lie in the contamination of the two 
incongruous notions of Good and of Being. If you assume, 
as | do, that Good is a moral judgment and not substantial in 
itself, then Evil is its opposite and just as non-substantial as 
the first. If however you assume that Good is Being, then 
Evil can be nothing else than Non-Being. . . . 

Things are quite simple if you could only admit that 
Good and Evil are judgments, having nothing to do with the 
incommensurable concept of Being. . . . 

Is it quite impossible for a theologian to admit the obvi- 
ous fact of Good and Evil being moral judgments and as 
such relative to an observer? There is not the faintest evi- 
dence for the identity of Good and Being. God is certainly 
Being itself and you call Him the Summum Bonum.?? 


To THE REV. MORTON T. KELSEY... . 


It is permissible to assume that the Summum Bonum is so 
good, so high, so perfect, but so remote that it is entirely 
beyond our grasp. But it is equally permissible to assume 
that the ultimate reality is a being representing all the qual- 
ities of its creation, virtue, reason, intelligence, kindness, 
consciousness, and their opposites, to our minds a com- 
plete paradox. The latter view fits the facts of human exis- 
tence, whereas the former cannot explain away the obvious 
existence of evil and suffering. Whence evil? — this age-old 


‘46 CARL JUNC 


WouNDED HEALER OF THE SOUL 


E 1 


Detail of Christ Crowned 
with Thorns 


Painting by Antonello da 
Messina (1430-1479). 


Agreeing with Meister 
Eckhart, Jung said God 
^must be born in man 
forever...the creator 
sees himself through the 
eyes of man's conscious- 
ness." 


ART THREE: OF THE SOUL 


question is not answered unless you assume the 
existence of a supreme being who is in the main 
unconscious. Such a model would explain why 
God has created a man gifted with consciousness 
and why He seeks His goal in him. In this the Old 
Testament, the New Testament, and Buddhism 
agree. Meister Eckhart said it: "God is not blessed 
in his [mere] Godhead. He must be born in man 
forever." This is what happens in Job: The creator 
sees himself through the eyes of man's conscious- 
ness and this is the reason why God has to 
become man, and why man is progressively gifted 
with the dangerous prerogative of the divine 
"mind." You have it in Christ's saying: "Ye are 
gods" and man has not even begun yet to know 
himself.?9 


In Answer to Job Jung sees the duality of the God-image reflect- 
ed also in humanity: "A paradoxical God image forces man to come 
to terms with his own paradoxicality." This corresponding conflict 
of opposites in acute form brings the human being much suffering 
and trials which, if endured, can be transcended. 


Only through the most extreme and menacing conflict does 
the Christian experience deliverance into divinity, always 
provided he doesn't break, but accepts the burden of being 
marked by God. In this way alone can the imago Dei realize 
itself in him and God become man. .. .?? 


The Christian Church has hitherto . . . [recognized] Christ as 
the one and only God-man. But the indwelling of the Holy 
Ghost, the third Divine Person, in man, brings about a Chris- 
tification of many, and the question then arises whether 
these many are all complete God-men. ... It is well to 
remind ourselves of St. Paul and his split consciousness: on 
one side he felt he was the apostle directly called and 
enlightened by God, and, on the other side, a sinful man 
who could not pluck out the “thorn in the flesh" and rid 
himself of the Satanic angel who plagued him. That is to say 
even the enlightened person remains what he is, and is 
never more than his own limited ego before the One who 
dwells within him, whose form has no knowable bound- 
aries, who encompasses him on all sides, fathomless as the 
abysms of the earth and vast as the sky?! 


ANSWER TOJOB 147 


OPPOSITE 
Christ and Buddha 


Painting by Paul Ranson, 
c. 1890-1992. 


Jung recognized that 


all religions reveal God: 


"| could give none 
preference over the 
other." 


PART THREE: OF THE SOUL 


Jung and Christianity 


Many times Jung used to say to close friends, “They would have 
burned me as a heretic in the Middle Ages.” His relationship to 
Christianity was that of a critical insider/outsider with a universal 
point of view. 


I positively do not believe that Christianity is the only and 
the highest manifestation of the truth. There is at least as 
much truth in Buddhism and in other religions too.?? 


Jesus — Mani — Buddha — Lao-tse are for me the pillars of 
the temple of the spirit. | could give none preference over 
the other.?? 


I only wish the theologians would accept the Kabbala and 
India and China as well so as to proclaim still more clearly 
how God reveals himself. If in the process Christianity 
should be relativized up to a point, this would be ad 
majorem Dei gloriam [for the greater glory of God] and 
would do no harm to Christian doctrine.34 


For Jung, Christianity was not a static religion founded in a 
complete state two thousand years ago: "The Christian symbolis a 
living being that carries the seeds of further development in itself." 
Although "its foundations remain the same eternally,” “Christian- 
ity must be interpreted anew in each aeon,” otherwise “it suffocates 
in traditionalism.” 


We are still looking back to the pentecostal events in a 
dazed way instead of looking forward to the goal the spirit 
is leading us to. Therefore mankind is wholly unprepared 
for the things to come. Man is compelled by divine forces to 
go forward to increasing consciousness and cognition, 
developing further and further away from his religious 
background because he does not understand it any more. 
His religious leaders and teachers are still hypnotized by the 
beginning of a then-new aeon of consciousness instead of 
understanding them and their implications. What was once 
called the “Holy Ghost” is an impelling force, creating wider 
consciousness and responsibility and thus enriched cogni- 
tion. The real history of the world seems to be the progres- 
sive incarnation of the deity.35 


JUNG AND CHRISTIANITY 


“Progressive incarnation” is not found in blind imitation of the 
founder of Christianity. Jung asked one theologian, “How do you 


make it clear to your listeners that Christ’s death and resurrection 


is their death and resurrection?” A metaphoric death and rebirth 
can be found by taking up our own cross of opposites and living 


them out as fullv and individuallv as Jesus did his. 


Christ... took himself with exemplary seriousness and 
lived his life to the bitter end, regardless of human conven- 
tion and in opposition to his own lawful tradition, as the 
worst heretic in the eyes of the Jews and a madman in the 
eyes of his family. But we? We imitate Christ and hope he 
will deliver us from our own fate. Like little lambs we follow 
the shepherd, naturally to good pastures. No talk at all of 
uniting our Above and Below! On the contrary Christ and 
his cross deliver us from our conflict, which we simply leave 
alone. ... Instead of bearing ourselves, i.e., our own cross, 
ourselves, we load Christ with our unresolved conflicts. We 
"place ourselves under his cross," but by golly not under our 
own. ... The cross of Christ was borne by himself and was 
his. To put oneself under somebody else's cross, which has 
already been carried by him, is certainly easier than to car- 
ry your own cross amid the mockery and contempt of the 
world. That way you remain nicely ensconced in tradition 
and are praised as devout. This is well-organized Pharisaism 
and highly un-Christian. Whoever imitates Christ and has 
the cheek to want to take Christ's cross on himself when he 
can't even carry his own has in my view not yet learnt the 
ABC of the Christian message. 

Have your congregation understood that they must 
close their eyes to the traditional teachings and go through 
the darkness of their own souls and set aside everything in 
order to become that which every individual bears in him- 
self as his individual task, and that no one can take this bur- 
den from him? We continually pray that “this cup may pass 
from us" and not harm us. Even Christ did so, but without 
success. ... We might . . . discover, among other things, that 
in every feature Christ's life is a prototype of individuation 
and hence cannot be imitated: one can only live one's own 


life totally in the same way with all the consequences this 
antaile 36 


OPPOSITE 
Christ on Cross 
Bronze, German, c. 1000 


Jung saw Christ's death 
and resurrection as a 
metaphor for our own 
death and rebirth. He 
suggested that carrying 
our own cross of 
opposites as completely 


To Jung, Christianity, as opposed to Christ's teachings, had lost as Jesus did his is the 
tanch with vital elements of life. which it needed to restore to way to true healing. 


Cans Trae 


WOUNDED HEALER OF THE SOUL 


PART THREE: OF THE SOUL JUNG AND CHRISTIANITY 151 


achieve wholeness. “We are cut off from our earth through more 
than two thousand years of Christian training."? This exclusion of 
nature and animals, the repression of Eros and creative fantasy 
alienated man from his own instincts as well as from the deeper 
impersonal forces. In the same way "God-awful legalistic religion" 
and over-reliance on faith got in the way of gnosis, or direct know- 
ing of God. "Religion," he said "is a defense against religious expe- 
rience." 

When Jung was presented with a gift of Volume One of the 
fourth-century Gnostic documents, discovered at Nag Hammadi 
in 1945, he found in this "Jung Codex" a confirmation of many of 
his own ideas, including the individuation process and religion as 
gnosis. 


St. Paul for instance was not converted to Christianity by 
intellectual or philosophical endeavor or by a belief, but by 


Ouroboros. 


The serpent that eats and recreates 
itself, the ouroboros is an ancient 
symbol of eternal becoming, which 
the Gnostics also used to characterize 
the cosmos. Jung discovered in 
fourth-century Gnostic texts (found 
in 1945) confirmation of many of his 
own ideas. 


152 CARL JUNG WOUNDED HEALER OF THE SOUL 


Part THREE: OF THE SOUL 


the force of his immediate experience. His belief was based 
upon it but our modern theology turns the thing round and 
holds that we first ought to believe, and then we would have 
an inner experience, but this reversal forces people into a 
wrong rationalism and excludes even the possibility of a 
religious experience.*® 


People speak of belief when they have lost knowledge. 
Belief and disbelief in God are mere surrogates. The naive 
primitive doesn’t believe in God, he knows, because 
the inner experience rightly means as much to him as the 
outer. He still has no theology and hasn't yet let himself be 
befuddled by booby trap concepts. He adjusts his life — of 
necessity — to outer and inner facts, which he does not — 
as we do — feel to be discontinuous. He lives in one world 
whereas we live only in one half and merely believe in the 
other or not at all. We have blotted it out with so-called 
“spiritual development,” which means that we live by self- 
fabricated electric light — and to heighten the comedy — 
believe or don't believe in the sun.?? 


Jung often weighed the warring opposites within Christianity. 
While he might plump for Protestant private conscience over 
Catholic authoritarian collectivism, he deplored the former's loss of 
ritual and symbolism, its rationalistic, ^tied to the Bible," ^Christo- 
centric,” “one third of the godhead" Christianity. At least Catholi- 
cism acknowledged "continuing revelation" and also the feminine 
principle in Mary as mediatrix and queen of heaven. 

He complained, "The fact that I as a Christian struggle to unite 
Catholicism and Protestantism within myself is chalked up against 
me in true Pharasaic fashion as blatant proof of lack of character.” 40 
Yet "finding a mediating position" between the many Christian 
sects would point to even further development. 


Since this world is one world we are faced with the ques- 
tion: How do we come to grips with it? We cannot simply 
restrict ourselves to our view of the world, but must per- 
force find a standpoint from which a view will be possible 
that goes a little step beyond the Christian as well as the 
Buddhist, etc.... One cannot be simply Protestant or 
Catholic. That is much too facile, for in the end the one is 
the other's brother and this cannot be got rid of simply by 
declaring one of them invalid.” 


JUNG AND CHRISTIANITY 


One clergyman Jung tussled with, Pastor Walter Bernet, pub- 
lished extracts of their correspondence in an essay concluding: 


This outsider of theology has, with the relentless determi- 
nation with which he demands experience of man, with his 
uncomfortable criticism of ecclesiastical talk of God, with 
his bold vision in particular of the Protestant Church, urged 
upon contemporary theological thought questions which in 
the interest of theology are absolutely necessary and which 
in their rigor show the way.*2 


Statue of Mary bolted to 
the ocean floor, coast of 
South America, 1978. 


Photograph by Rosalie 
Winard. 


Jung, who decried 

the submergence of the 
feminine in patriarchal 
religions, felt it to be 
partly redeemed by 
Catholic recognition of 
Mary as mediatrix and 
Queen of Heaven. 


154 CARL JUNG WOUNDED HEALER OF THE SOUL 


Saint Michael and the 
Dragon 


French engraving, 1644. 


jung wrote that a true 
Christian is not meant for 
peace but for war, 
symbolized here by Saint 
Michael and the dragon. 
A conscious human 
being, by incorporating 
the opposing forces that 
battle within, goes on to 
become "an instrument 
of God.” 


To his friend, Father Victor White, Jung wrote, 


No Christian is meant to sleep in a safe pew. . . . | have dis- 
covered in my private life that a true Christian is not bedded 
upon roses and he is not meant for peace and tranquillity of 
mind but for war. And again | am realizing profoundly that 
not everybody's nature is as bellicose as mine, although I 
have attained — Deo concedente — a certain state of peace 
within, paid for by a rather uncomfortable state of war with- 
out. But even if a peaceful nature has reached a certain 
higher level of consciousness he cannot escape the raging 
conflict of opposites in his soul, as God wants to unite his 
opposites in man. As soon as a more honest and complete 
consciousness beyond the collective has been established, 
man is no more an end in himself, but becomes an instru- 
ment of God, and this is really so and no joke about it. 


PART THREE: OF THE SOUL JUNG AND CHRISTIANITY 155 


WOUNDED HEALER OF THE SOUL 


156 CARL JUNG 


OPPOSITE 
Kabbalistic Tree of Life 


Painting by James & Nancy 
Wasserman, 1992. 

The “new physics” points 
to connections seen in 
esoteric traditions such as 
Kabbalah. Jung saw that 
his ideas would be vindi- 
cated by new discoveries 
in higher mathematics 
and science. 


PART THREE: OF THE SOUL 


Synchronicity 


No sooner had Jung taken on Job, God, and Christian theologians 
than he added in scientists. His thesis on psychic synchronicity, 
with its challenge to conventional ideas of time, space, and causal- 
ity, created a stir in scientific circles. He had often said that his psy- 
chology would be accepted and proven, not by his psychiatric 
colleagues, but by the new physics, and it was an eminent scientist 
who originally sparked his mind towards synchronicity, a scientist 
who was himself inspired in his main work by a dream. 


Professor Einstein was my guest on several occasions at 
dinner. ... These were very early days when Einstein was 
developing his first theory of relativity. He tried to instill into 
us the elements of it, more or less successfully. As non- 
mathematicians we psychiatrists had difficulty in following 
his arguments. Even so, | understood enough to form a 
powerful impression of him. It was above all the simplicity 
and directness of his genius as a thinker that impressed me 
mightily and exerted a lasting influence on my own intellec- 
tual work. It was Einstein who first started me off thinking 
about a relativity of time as well as space, and their psychic 
conditionality. More than thirty years later this stimulus led 
to my relation with the physicist Professor W. Pauli and to 
my thesis of psychic synchronicity. 


Jung waited twenty cautious years before publishing his materi- 
al. When he did, it was in tandem with Wolfgang Pauli, Nobel Prize- 
winning physicist and friend. In the publication The Interpretation of 
Nature and the Psyche, Pauli contributed an essay on “The Influence 
of Archetypal Ideas on the Scientific Theories of Kepler.” Jung’s 
essay was “Synchronicity: An Acausal Connecting Principle.” 

For years he had exchanged ideas on the growing relationship 
between modern physics and psychology with Pauli and other sci- 
entists. Both disciplines, he said, “are entering a sphere — the one 
from without, the other from within — which is unknown. That's 
the reason for the parleys between psychology and higher mathe- 
matics." "In modern physics the possibility that the world has sev- 
eral dimensions is no longer denied." 


Dear Professor Pauli, 


Best thanks for kindly sending me Jordan's paper. | think this 
paper should be published, as it is concerned with the 


SYNCHRONICITY 157 


Eskimo Nebula 
(NGC-2392) 


Photograph by Hubble 
Space Telescope, NASA, 
2000. 


Whether seeing our 
world from the outside or 
inside, modern physics 
and modern psychology 
both admit the effect of 
the observer on the 
observed. 


actual changeover of the physicist’s mode of observation to 
the psychological field. This paper was inevitable. Having 
come to the conclusion that the observed is also a distur- 
bance by the observer, the consistent investigator of the 
unknown interior of the atom could not help seeing that the 
nature of the observing process becomes perceptible in the 
disturbance caused by the observation. To put it more sim- 
ply, if you look long enough into a dark hole you perceive 
what is looking in. This is also the principle of cognition in 
yoga, which derives all cognition from the absolute empti- 
ness of consciousness. ^6 


FROM PROFESSOR WOLFGANG PAULI — 
Dear Professor Jung, 


The epistemological situation with regard to the concepts 
"conscious" and "unconscious" seems to offer a pretty close 
analogy to the ^complementarity" situation in physics. Every 
"observation of the unconscious," i.e., every conscious real- 
ization of unconscious contents, has an uncontrollable reac- 
tive effect on these same contents. . . . It is undeniable that 


158 CARL JUNG WOUNDED HEALER OF THE SOUL 


the development of “microphysics” has brought the way in 
which nature is described in this science very much closer 
to that of the new psychology.” 


JUNG TO PROFESSOR NELSON — 

The comparison of modern psychology to modern physics 
is no idle talk. Both disciplines have, for all their diametrical 
opposition, one most important point in common, namely 
the fact that they both approach the hitherto “transcenden- 
tal” region of the Invisible and Intangible, the world of 
merely analogous thought.*® 


Synchronicity demonstrates the invisible world in action in 
what Jung called “a creation in time.” 


Synchronicity states that a certain psychic event is paral- 
leled by some external non-psychic event and that there is 


The Worship of the Scarab : : . 
em no causal connection between them. It is a parallelism of 

Engraving after an Egyptian meaning 6 

painting. 8 

Synehroniety operates As one example of this meaningful coincidence in time, Jung 


in “meaningful coinci- 


dence," as when Jung tells of the sudden appearance in the physical world of a beetle 


observed a beetle atthe resembling a scarab, the Egyptian symbol of rebirth, just as a 
window just as a patient patient was relating her dream of a golden scarab. A dream fore- 
was describing her dream telling a death or catastrophe that later occurs might be another 
of a golden scarab, example. A clock stopping or a glass shattering at the moment of a 
symbol of renewal. death would be synchronicity. 

Such occurrences have no logical 
explanation or physical cause. Time 
and space become relative. Psyche and 
matter have merged, inner and outer 
life coincided; not in cause and effect 
but "a falling together in time — 
simultaneity." 

The point of a synchronous event is 
its meaningfulness to the experiencer, 
which in turn signals the larger forces 
of life operating in the background, the 
"organizer" of the phenomenon, the 
transcendental cause. In the Middle 
Ages this was accepted under the term 
“correspondences.” Chinese science, 
including the "readable archetypes" of 
I Ching, is based on the same principle. 


'ART THREE: OF THE SOU SYNCHRONICHY 159 


Astrological Correspondences 
Woodcut, 1630. 


Correspondences are visible in the lexicon of 
astrology. Modes of perception, symbolically 
organized as zodiacal “signs,” influence areas of 
the human body, uniting the cosmos with man. 


Jung called synchronicity “acausal orderedness,” a principle not 
contradicting the scientific time, space, and causality modes of 
Western thinking, but rather a complementary addition to it. Where 
scientific experimental research is based on regular events that can 
be repeated and quantified by statistics, synchronicity points to the 
exception that is hard to verify objectively, though it is subjectively 
meaningful. Yet “exceptions are facts and cannot be treated as non- 
existent.” They are a “special class of natural events.” 


The statistical method of science stands in a relationship ot 
complementarity to synchronicity. This means that when we 
observe statistically we eliminate the synchronicity phe- 
nomena and... when we establish synchronicity we must 
abandon the statistical method.^? 


The causalism that underlies our scientific picture of the 


world breaks everything down into individual processes 
which it punctiliously tries to isolate from all other parallel 


1hr ~~ CARL JUNG WouUNDED HEALER OF THE SOUI 


Left-Handed Tantra Yantra 
#3 


Painting by Morris Graves, 
1982. 

The “new physics” 
reminds us that all is 
energetically connected 
in physical fact and in 
psychic meaning. 


PART THREE: OF THE SOUL 


processes. This tendency is absolutely neces- 
sary if we are to gain a reliable knowledge of 
the world, but philosophically it has the dis- 
advantage of breaking up, or obscuring, the 
universal interrelationship of events so that a 
recognition of the greater relationship, i.e. the 
unity of the world, becomes more and more 
difficult. Everything that happens, however, 
happens in the same “one world” and is part 
of it. For this reason events must have an a pri- 
ori aspect of unity. 


Modern physics already points in this direction. 
The traditional scientific concept of natural law 
backed by causality has been challenged internally, 
particularly in the cosmic arena (the very large) and 
the subatomic (the very small), where four-dimen- 
sional thinking is now accepted. 


Modern physics shattered the absolute valid- 
ity of natural law and made it relative. . . . But 
if cause and effect turns out to be only statis- 
tically valid and relatively true we have to 
look for other factors of explanation in 
explaining natural processes.°? 


“Certain phenomena of synchronicity seem to be bound up 
with the archetypes.” Synchronistic events nearly always occur 
during, or because of, heightened emotion. It’s as if the threshold of 
consciousness is lowered, which then allows the unconscious and 
its contents to show themselves in conscious life. 

These spheres of heightened emotion occur within archetypal 
situations such as death, mortal danger, catastrophes, mental or 
physical illness, or relationship crises, which demonstrate innate 
“patterns of behavior that are universal in character, arousing the 
same feelings in everyone.” Similarly, close-bonded archetypal 
relationships such as those between mother and child or between 
lovers often produce synchronistic telepathic communication. 

For Jung, the archetypes are “an imprint which presupposes an 
imprinter’; “the archetype is only the name of Tao, not Tao itself.” 
And “just as the physicist regards the atom as a model I regard 
archetypal ideas as sketches for the purpose of visualizing the 
unknown background.” 


SYNCHRONICITY 161 


We ... have to expect a factor in the 
psyche that is not subject to the laws 
of time and space, as it is on the con- 
trary capable of suppressing them to 
a certain extent. In other words: this 
factor is expected to manifest the 
qualities of time- and spacelessness, 
i.e., "eternity" and “ubiquity.” Psy- 
chological experience knows of such 
a factor; it is what I call the arche- 
type, which is ubiquitous in time and 
space, of course relatively speaking. 
It is a structural element of the psy- 
che we find everywhere and at all 
times; and it is that in which all indi- 
vidual psyches are identical with 
each other, and where they function 
as if they were the one undivided 
Psyche the ancients called anima 
mundi or the psyche tou kosmou 
[cosmic psyche]. This is no meta- 
physical speculation but an observ- 
able fact, and therefore the key to 
innumerable mythologies, that is to 
the manifestations of unconscious 
fantasy. . . . It may be, from a psycho- 
logical point of view, a mere similar- 


ity and not a unity in essence . . . but 

here parapsychology comes in, with its psi-phenomena that 
unmistakably show an essential identity of two separate 
events, as for instance the act of prevision and the objective 
precognized fact. These experiences show that the factor in 
question is one and the same inside and outside the psy- 
che. ... In our ordinary minds we are in the worlds of time 
and space and within the individual psyche. In the state of 
the archetype we are in the collective psyche, in a world- 
system whose space-time categories are relatively or 
absolutely abolished. 

This is about as far as we can go safely. | see no way 
beyond, since we are not capable of functioning in a four- 
dimensional system at will; it only can happen to us. 
Our intellectual means reach only as far as archetypal expe- 
riences, but within that sphere we are not the motors, we 
are the moved objects. Experiment in the ordinary sense 


CARL JUNG 


The Four Brains 


Aboriginal painting by 
Rachel Napaljarri Jurra, 
Waadpiri people, Central 
Australia, 1992. 
Aboriginal philosophy 
posits four brains for the 
human experience, four 
levels that describe our 
relationship to our world: 
story brain (Tjukurrpa), 
myths/thought; family 
brain (Walytju), relation- 
ships/emotions; country 
brain (Ngurra), geography/ 
environment; body brain 
(Kurunpa), physical/ 
molecular. 


WouNDED HEALER OF THE SOUL 


Detail of Two Lovers 
Manuscript painting by Reza-ye ‘Abbasi, Iran, Safavid Period, 1630. 


Lovers throughout history and literature have so bonded that they 
are “one hand, one heart" and can think each other's thoughts. 


THREE: OF THE SOUL SYNCHRONICITY 163 


OPPOSITE 
The Naming 


Painting by Joe Geshick, 
Ojibway, 1993. 

Jung felt misunderstood 
by his contemporaries; his 
loneliness was that of the 
pioneer, he who dreams 
alone and visits uncharted 
territory in order to return 
and tell of his discoveries. 


PART THREE: OF THE SOUL 


therefore becomes impossible. ... There is no regularity 
between archetype and synchronistic event. . . . 

| think you are correct in assuming that synchronicity, 
though in practice a relatively rare phenomenon, is an all- 
pervading factor of principle in the universe, i.e., in the 
Unus Mundus, where there is no incommensurability 
between so-called matter and co-called psyche. Here one 
gets into deep waters, at least | myself must confess that | 
am far from having sounded these abysmal depths. 

In this connection | always come upon the enigma of the 
natural number. | have a distinct feeling that Number is a 
key to the mystery, since it is just as much discovered as it is 
invented. It is quantity as well as meaning. For the latter | 
refer to the arithmetical qualities of the fundamental arche- 
type of the self . . . and its historically and empirically well- 
documented variants of the Four. . . . 

It seems that | am too old to solve such riddles, but | do 
hope that a young mind will take up the challenge. It would 
be worth while.5? 


With graduation diploma in hand, analyst William Alex went to 


Jung’s home in Zürich to say goodbye. 


To my surprise he accompanied me... down the street 
toward my parked car. Jung continued to walk beside me 
silently, pipe in mouth, evidently lost in thought, and I, too, 
said nothing. Suddenly he turned to me and asked "Why 
don't they understand me?" There was a tone in his voice I 
had not heard before that was at once plaintive, question- 
ing, and hurt. | instinctively felt | knew what “they” referred 
to. “They” was the world out there, the world of science, of 
academic psychology and psychiatry, of organized religions, 
of prejudices that persist in misunderstanding and misquot- 
ing his discoveries and insights into the inner world, the 
human soul. | sensed in his question some of the loneliness 
of the explorer, of the quester who dares to look beyond 
the accepted and the known; who cannot do otherwise. 

I answered “Dr. Jung, you know as well as any man alive 
why they don’t understand you. Is it not because you are 
probably fifty or a hundred years ahead of your time?” He 
looked at me for a brief while, nodded quietly, extended his 
hand for a final handshake.^* 


SYNCHRONICITY 


165 


Letters 


Although Jung saw a stream of distinguished international visi- 
tors, more and more he used letters to keep in touch with the world 
and to communicate his ideas. Altogether, they are an 
important aid to the interpretation of his work. He held 
written discussions with parapsychologist J. B. Rhine, a 
Japanese philosopher, an Indian biologist, theologians of 
all persuasions, an Irish priest in remote Donegal, and a 
West Australian teacher/author. 

He corresponded with international writers Her- 
mann Hesse, James Joyce, Erich Neumann, Miguel 
Serrano, Sir Laurens van der Post, Sir Herbert Read, 
Upton Sinclair, J. B. Priestley, H. G. Wells, and Count 
Keyserling. 

The great bulk of his correspondence was with peo- 
ple unknown to him, like the American, describing him- 
self as “just a little fellow, fifty-eight years old and 
employed as a packer,” who wanted Jung’s view on 
reincarnation. To Jung it meant that while “the use of 
psychotherapy is reserved for medical specialists,” what 
might be called “the ‘explanation’ reaches a lot more 
people than I would have thought possible.” 


I always remember a letter | received one morning, Sir Laurens van der Post, 
from a woman who wanted to see me just once in her life. author, explorer, and 
The letter made a very strong impression on me, | am not scholar. 
quite sure why. | invited her to come and she came. She For many years a student 
was very poor — poor intellectually too. | don't believe she and champion of Jung's 
had ever finished primary school. She kept house for her ideas, van der Post has 
brother; they ran a little newsstand. | asked her kindly if she CREE impact 
on his lite. 


really understood my books which she said she had read. 
And she replied in this extraordinary way "Your books are 
not books, Herr Professor, they are bread." 

And the little travelling salesman of women's things, who 
stopped me in the street and looked at me with immense 
eyes, saying "Are you really the man who writes those 
books? Are you truly the one who writes about these things 
no one knows?"55 


At times letters to Jung reached "avalanche" proportions, caus- 


ing him to grumble and complain because they tired him out. Occa- 
sionally he ran away from them by tying a bundle in string and 


166 CARL JUNG WOUNDED HEALER OF THE SOUL 


PART THREE: OF THE SOUL 


hiding them quickly to pretend they hadn't come. But he needed 
them. They were a balance to an introverted life, and a way of air- 
ing his creative thoughts as his energy for scientific work lessened. 
Jung in his late seventies no longer taught at the C. G. Jung Insti- 
tute, though Emma did. But twice yearly he invited diploma can- 
didates, like Peter Lynn, to his Küsnacht house for “fireside chats.” 


He would stand by the fireplace, pipe in mouth, and ask for 
questions on anything and everything, encouraging us to 
engage him in dialogue. My most vivid recollection of these 
extraordinary evenings is the experience of Jung as a giant 
whose head touched the clouds and whose feet were root- 
ed in the very center of the earth. Within the same sentence 
he would connect an earthy, peasant-type joke (laughing 
uproariously) with an obscure pre-Christian myth, both 
directly relevant to the question under discussion. | used 
to come away from these gatherings with a great sense of 
awe, having glimpsed ultimate issues in a thoroughly human 
context.56 


James Aylward was Catholic priest as well as Institute student 
when he met with Jung in his garden. 


Jung brings up God as the most proper subject of conversa- 
tion between two human beings. He says that most people 
don't look on God as worthy of entry into a salon. People — 
even theologians — are embarrassed to talk about God. It is 
more polite to talk about sex.°” 


As Jung was to write later: 


The decisive question for man is: Is he related to something 
infinite or not? That is the telling question of his life. Only if 
we know that the thing which truly matters is the infinite 
can we avoid fixing our interests upon futilities, and upon all 
kinds of goals which are not of real importance. ... If we 
understand and feel that here in this life we already have a 
link with the infinite, desires and attitudes change. In the 
final analysis, we count for something only because of the 
essential we embody, and if we do not embody that, life is 
wasted. In our relationships to other men, too, the crucial 
question is whether an element of boundlessness is 
expressed in the relationship. 


LETTERS 167 


The feeling for the infinite, however, can be attained 
only if we are bounded to the utmost. . . . Only conscious- 
ness of our narrow confinement in the self forms the link to 
the limitlessness of the unconscious. In such awareness we 
experience ourselves concurrently as limited and eternal, as 
both the one and the other.” 


168 CARLJUNG 


Man at the Center of the 
Universe 

Manuscript painting by 
Hildegarde of Bingen, from 
Codex Latinum, c. 1200. 


For Jung, the burning 
question for every human 
being was “Is he related to 
something infinite or 
not?” thus helping to 
ground our lives in 
essential values. 


WOUNDED HEALER OF THE SOUL 


Rose on cruciform stem. 
Rosicrucian symbol. 


PART THREE: OF THE SOUL 


Toni 


Th March 1953, while Jung was still writing his last big scientific 
work, Toni Wolff died suddenly in her sleep. She was sixty-five. 


On the day of her death even before I had received the 
news | suffered a relapse and had a bad attack of my tachy- 
cardia. This has now subsided but it has left an arrhythmia 
which hampers my physical capacities very much. . . . Toni 
Wolff's death was so sudden, so totally unexpected that one 
could hardly realize her passing. | had seen her only two 
days before. Both of us completely unsuspecting.°? 


Jung and Toni had not seen as much of each other as usual in 
her last years. Her retirement as president of the Psychological 
Club in 1948 after twenty distinguished years had taken her out of 
the limelight, while a severe arthritic condition had made the 
Bollingen retreat too primitive for her health to sustain, though she 
continued her analytic work to the end. And, regardless of outer 
circumstance, Jung's attention toward her may have diminished. 

It has been said of Toni Wolff that "of all those closest to Jung 
she suffered most." To friend and colleague Barbara Hannah, Toni 
said once that on no account did she want to outlive Jung. He in 
turn confided that, as Toni was thirteen years younger than he, "I 
never seriously considered the possibility that she could die before 
me." His own health prevented him from going to the funeral, 
although Emma attended the memorial service. 

In a letter to a friend, Jung 
wrote, 


The loss of Fráulein Wolff has 
hit me very hard indeed. She 
has left behind in her circle a 
gap that can never be filled. 


Barbara Hannah describes 
Jung's reaction: 


Outwardly he kept extremely 
calm, so that both his wife 
and his secretary told me 
they thought he had over- 
come the shock after a few 


Toni 169 


OPPOSITE 


Toni Wolff in garden at 
Bollingen. 

Although Jung tried to 
get Toni Wolff's scientific 
writings published after 
her death in 1953, as yet 


they remain unpublished. 


PART THREE: OF THE SOUL 


days, but from my notes for April 1953, I see that he said 
himself that his pulse was still between eighty and 120; 
moreover this trouble continued for some time. He had 
been helped, it is true, by seeing Toni in a dream ... on 
Easter Eve, looking much taller and younger than she had 
been when she died, and exceedingly beautiful. She was 
wearing a frock of all the colors of a bird of paradise, with 
the wonderful blue of the kingfisher as the most empha- 
sized color. He saw just her image, there was no action in 
the dream, and he was especially impressed by having 
dreamed it on the night of the resurrection.$! 


In 1958, Jung initiated efforts to have Toni Wolff's writings 
published. 


Dear Dr. Brody. ... 


I feel the need to recommend the collected papers of Toni 
Wolff to your attention. . . . They are distinguished not only 
by their intellectual content but by the fact that the author 
had personally experienced the development of analytical 
psychology from the fateful year of 1912 right up to 
the recent past and was thus in a position to record her 
reactions and sympathetic interest from the first. Her papers 
also have a documentary value. Even those who did 
not know the author personally will glean from them an 
impression of the versatility and depth of her spiritual 
personality.9? 


When Toni's Studies in Jungian Psychology was published, Jung 
wrote in the introduction that he was "discharging a debt of thanks 
[to] my friend and collaborator for more than forty years" who 
"took an active part in all phases of the development of analytical 
psychology” including “working out practical methods of analysis 
and ... the task of theoretical formulation" plus “a silent experi- 
ment in group psychology. . . which constitutes the life of the Psy- 
chological Club in Zürich." He pointed to "her high natural 
intelligence and quite exceptional psychological insight," saying 
"these essays are uncommonly instructive and stimulating." 

The privacy of their personal relationship he preserved by 
destroying Toni's letters to him and his to her. Six years later, in dis- 
cussing the story of the Queen of Sheba with its chronicler Miguel 
Serrano, Jung spoke "of a magic kind of love never for matrimony" 
and of mystic weddings that were"in reality a process of mutual 
individuation." 


Toni 71 


Jung went on as if talking to himself, “Somewhere there was The Divine Land 


once a Flower, a Stone, a Crystal, a Queen, a King, a Palace, Gouache by Cecil Collins, 
a Lover and his Beloved, and this was long ago, on an Island 1979. 

somewhere in the ocean five thousand years ago. . . . Such is Jung spoke to a friend of a 
Love, the Mystic Flower of the Soul. This is the Center, the magical island where lived 
Self... .” the “mystic flower of the 


soul,” alluding to Toni 


ung spoke as if in a trance. 
J B Sp Wolff. 


“Nobody understands what | mean" he said, “only a 
poet could begin to understand". . . 
“You are a poet,” I said, moved by what | had heard. 
“And that woman, is she still alive?" | asked. OPPOSITE 
“She died eight years ago. . . . | am very old."9? Anastasis | 
Painting by Alex Rapoport, 
1996. 
Jung wrote of the need 
for "conscious suffering." 
We can “wake up” to a 
fuller existence only when 
we are willing to bear our 
own burden in life. 


172 CARL JUNG WOUNDED HEALER OF THE SOUL 


PART THREE: OF THE SOUL 


TONI 


173 


WOUNDED HEALER OF THE SOUL 


174 CARL JUNG 


OPPOSITE 
Jung in his garden at age 
eighty. — 

Even in old age, 

Jung exuded a palpable 
authority and power 
sensed by those who 
consulted him. 


PART THREE: OF THE SOUL 


Four Decades On 


Approaching the age of seventy-nine, a tiring Jung, with all his 
experience and erudition, still encountered old recurring patterns 
of depression and doubt about himself, “appalled by the inade- 
quacy of what I have done.” It was one polarity of his range of 
being, though now the personal could be enlarged into an under- 
standing of life’s inevitable flow, shaded dark as well as light. 


I observe myself in the stillness of Bollingen, with the expe- 
rience of almost eight decades now, and | have to admit that 
I have found no plain answer to myself. | am in doubt about 
myself as much as ever, the more so the more | try to say 
something definite. It is even as though through familiarity 
with oneself one became still more alienated! ®* 


In a letter to his friend Father Victor White, he wrote of the 
necessity of conscious suffering. 


There is no place where those striving after consciousness 
could find absolute safety. Doubt and insecurity are indis- 
pensable components of a complete life. Only those who 
can lose this life really can gain it. A complete" life does not 
consist in a theoretical completeness, but in the fact that 
one accepts, without reservation, the particular fatal tissue 
in which one finds oneself embedded, and that one tries to 
make sense of it or to create a cosmos from the chaotic 
mess into which one is born. If one lives properly and com- 
pletely, time and again one will be confronted with a situa- 
tion of which one will say: “This is too much. | cannot bear 
it any more." Then the question must be answered: "Can 
one really not bear it2"65 


Man has to cope with the problem of suffering. The Ori- 
ental wants to get rid of suffering by casting it off. Western 
man tries to suppress suffering with drugs. But suffering has 
to be overcome, and the only way to overcome it is to 
endure it.56 a 


Aniela Jaffé characterized Jung, aged eighty: 


In 1955 his tall figure was slightly bent and even gave an 
impression of fragility. Yet most people overlooked this, 


Four DECADES ON 


because it paled beside the massive strength, the powerful- 
ness that radiated from him; no one who ever met him 
could escape its aura. It was not the powerfulness of an 
authoritarian; Jung was too good-natured for that, too kind- 
ly, too outgoing even in old age and his humor too infec- 
tious. Nor was it the powerfulness one associates with 
erudition or with a highly differentiated and richly endowed 
intellect. ... What was so palpably impressive about him 
sprang from the superiority of a man who had engaged in a 
life-and-death struggle with the creative daemon and mas- 
tered him, but on whom the struggle had left its mark. This 
kind of powerfulness is profoundly human, does not arouse 
fear, is not crushing, does not embarrass or make you feel 
small, but changes you; it compels veneration and awe.57 


It was a big year for Jung, with an honorary doctorate of science 
from the Swiss Technological Institute and two publications — 
Volume One of Mysterium Coniunctionis, compiled in collaboration 
with Marie-Louise von Franz, and the psychological commentary 
on The Tibetan Book of the Great Liberation. The old anti-Semitic accu- 
sations surfaced again, this time to a powerful public rebuttal by a 
group of Jewish disciples. 

His eightieth birthday was celebrated at home, followed by sev- 
eral public receptions in Zürich, echoing those in Jungian strong- 
holds in London, New York, San Francisco, and Calcutta. Publicly 
he could be seen to enjoy the informal Institute party best, for all 
the newness of most of its teeming guests to him. 


Those are the people who will carry on my psychology — 
people who read my books and let me silently change their 
lives. It will not be carried on by the people on top, for they 
mostly give up Jungian psychology and take to prestige psy- 
chology instead.® 


Jung found, to his amusement, that he was becoming a tourist 
attraction “like the Berne bears” with boats steering past his home, 
sometimes blowing horns and ringing bells to his answering wave. 

Writers and journalists wanted interviews for print, radio, and 
television — Alberto Moravia, Mircea Eliade, Stephen Black, and 
John Freeman for the BBC, Charles Baudouin and others for 
French, English, Swiss, and American publications, including Time. 

In one interview, Jung cited intellectual kinships with Goethe 
and Faust, with William James, whom he’d met several times, and 
with the eighteenth-century Chasidic Rabbi Ber. In another, 


176 CARL JUNG WOUNDED HEALER OF THE SOUL 


Tibetan demon binding 
charm and incantation 
containing Om-mani- 
padme-hum, woodcut, 
Nepal. 


In 1955 Jung published 

a commentary on The 
Tibetan Book of the Great 
Liberation, based on his 
reading of the Eastern 
manual for progressing 
through different states of 
consciousness. 


PART THREE: OF THE SOUL 


“Sie, as 


^ Fr 
"E ^ 
Pe, FOr ea 


aS » 
"Xe 
is 
"qe 
nói 
C g 
p 
13 


Stephen Black likened Jung to a typical Swiss peasant, to which he 
smilingly replied "That is what I have often been called." 
As he wrote to Mary Bancroft in America, 


| have appeared in the world, if that is good for me. My 
name enjoys an existence quasi-independent of myself. My 
real self is actually chopping wood in Bollingen and cooking 
the meals, trying to forget the trial of an eightieth birthday.9? 


That didn't keep him from deep conversations in Zürich, as 
poet, author, and psychotherapist Sheila Moon recalled. 


Four DECADES ON 177 


In each of my hours with Dr. Jung I was aware of his sense of 
urgency about man's religious task, of his intense concern 
that each of us must be related to ourselves and to God not 
only inwardly but in the world, if we and the world are not 
to be destroyed. “We fear our serpent,” he said, “as we also 
fear the numinosum — so we run from it. . . . All we have to 
give the world and God is ourselves as we are. But this is the 
hardest of all tasks. Most of us want others to do it for us, to 
carry us along.”. . . Over and again he stressed his belief that 
“unless we live these things we profess, we are useless.” 

My last sight of him was in 1955 in Ascona. | had pho- 
tographed him with Mrs. Jung, seated at a table in the warm 
sunlight outside their hotel by the lake. Very Swiss, very 
solid, very genuine, very warm, they sat side by side, smiling, 
as we drove away."? 


178 CARL JUNG 


Jung and Emma at tea in 
their garden, Küsnacht, 
1955. 


WOUNDED HEALER OF THE SOUL 


Emma Jung, 1955. 


Wife, teacher, analyst, 
writer, mother of five, 
grandmother, Emma's 
dignity and equanimity is 
apparent in this portrait 
in the year of her death. 


PART THREE: OF THE SOUL 


Emma 


months. 


I found Mrs. Jung the most integrated 
person in Zirich.... 

I found myself deeply moved by a 
woman who had so obviously found 
herself and her own authenticity in 
the midst of so many collective pres- 
sures. She was the wife of Carl Jung, 
which was certainly not an easy task. 
And she maintained — or rather, 
achieved — an individuality separate 
from his. She became a scholar in 
later years which culminated in her 
excellent book, The Legend of the 
Holy Grail. Also she became a wise 
and sensitive analyst, pointing sim- 
ply and directly to what needed to 
be looked at. She was a joy to work 
with. . . . 

Mrs. Jung's quiet, penetrating, 
active and participating attitude 
helped one always to know that one was working in a reli- 
gious process where the unconscious was revealing — in 
even the slightest way — powers greater than the ego. But 
always | remember how she stressed the role of the ego in 
the development of consciousness. Mrs. Jung said to me, 
"There are egos and egos and egos. The problem is to find 
the right one.” To me, as | saw her, she had found hers and 
had related it to the deeper archetypal powers making for 
wholeness.?! 


On May 6, Jung wrote to Victor White: 


Dear Victor, 

The serious illness of my wife has consumed all my spare 
time. She has undergone an operation so far successfully, 
but it has left her in a feeble state needing careful nursing 
for several weeks to come.7? 


EMMA 


Í n the year 1955, Elizabeth Howes worked 
analytically with Emma Jung for several 


179 


In November, Australian author and teacher Rix Weaver hada 


meeting with Jung in his study in Küsnacht. 


Jung was called away . . . and I waited quite awhile. When he 
returned there was a change. He told me the doctor had 
just called and that his dear wife wouldn't recover. | offered 
to leave but he bade me stay. He then sat a little longer to 
speak. This time he said that life has to be lived fully. One 
has to live what one is, utilize one's potential. He spoke of 
his wife's life and its completeness, then added, "Death is a 
drawing together of two worlds, not an end. We are the 
bridge."7? 


Five days later, on November 27, 1955, Emma Jung died. 


Dear Neumann, 


Deepest thanks for your heartfelt letters. . . . | am sorry that 
| can only set down these dry words, but the shock 1 have 
experienced is so great that | can neither concentrate nor 
recover my power of speech. I would have liked to tell the 
heart that you have opened to me in friendship that two 
days before the death of my wife | had what one can only 
call a great illumination which, like a flash of lightning, lit up 
a centuries-old secret that was embodied in her and had 
exerted an unfathomable influence on my life. | can only 
suppose that the illumination came from my wife, who was 
then mostly in a coma, and that the tremendous lighting up 
and release of insight had a retroactive effect upon her, and 
was one reason why she could die such a painless and roy- 
al death. 

The quick and painless end — only five days between 
the final diagnosis and death — and this experience have 
been a great comfort to me. But the stillness and the audi- 
ble silence about me, the empty air and the infinite distance 
are hard to bear.”4 


At the funeral, in a packed church in Kiisnacht, Jung led in his 


family of five children and nineteen grandchildren. 


180 


Afterwards friends found him alone in his study, sobbing 
repeatedly, “She was a queen. She was a queen. 


75 


After the death of my wife ... | saw her in a dream which was 
like a vision. She stood at some distance from me, looking at 


CARL JUNG 


WOUNDED HEALER OF THE SOUL 


Jung at Bollingen, c. 1950s. 


In times of stress, Jung 
found that carving in 
stone gave him “inner 
stability.” 


PART THREE: OF THE SOUL 


me squarely. She was in her prime, perhaps about thirty, and 
wearing the dress which had been made for her many years 
before by my cousin the medium. It was perhaps the most 
beautiful thing she had ever worn. Her expression was nei- 
ther joyful nor sad, but, rather, objectively wise and under- 
standing, without the slightest emotional reaction, as 
though she were beyond the mist of affects. | knew that it 
was not she, but a portrait she had made or commissioned 
for me. It contained the beginning of our relationship, the 
events of fifty-three years of marriage, and the end of her 
life also. Face to face with such wholeness one remains 
speechless, for it can scarcely be comprehended.7 


Following a visit to his daughter Marianne, Jung wrote, 


EMMA 


181 


Dear Marianne, 
Warmest thanks for your lovely letter which was a great joy. 
| am glad you weren't bored with me. It was a joy to be 
together with you for a while. . . . 

Mama's death has left a gap for me that cannot be filled. 
So it is good if you have something you want to carry out 
and can turn to when the emptiness spreads about you too 
menacingly. The stone | am working on gives me inner sta- 
bility with its hardness and permanence and its meaning 
governs my thoughts.77 


Laurens van der Pi it recorded a late conversation he had with 
Tune: 


He told me towards the end of his life . . . [he] was carving in 
stone ... some sort of memorial of what Emma Jung and 
Toni Wolff had brought to his life. On the stone for his wife 
he was cutting the Chinese symbols meaning "She was the 
foundation of my house." On the stone intended for Toni 
Wolff he wanted to inscribe another Chinese character to 
the effect that she was the fragrance of the house.”8 


I Ching diagram. 
In his foreword to R. Wilhe 
translation of the / Ching, J 
wrote of the Chinese symt 


as "readable" archetypes. 


CARL JUN WOUNDED HEALER OF THE St 


The King Greets the 
Queen 


From Salomon Trismosin,. 


Splendor Solis, 1582. 


Mystical marriage, 

the coniunctio or 
chemical combination 
through “affinity,” is a 
form of mystic sexuality 
symbolizing spiritual 
union with our source. 


PART THREE: OF THE SOUL 


Mysterium Coniunctionis 


Wie publication of Jung’s deepest book, Mysterium Coniunctionis, 
was met with “stony incomprehension . . . at least for the time 
being." Although he wrote, "I have resigned myself to being 
posthumous," he also confessed, "sometimes I feel like an ana- 
chronism even to myself."7? 


MYSTERIUM CoNIUNCTIONIS 183 


Loneliness does not come from having no people about 
one, but from being unable to communicate the things that 
seem important to oneself, or from holding certain views 
which others find inadmissible.®° 


Like all his late works, Mysterium Coniunctionis had been incu- 
bating for decades. It represented a deeper turn of the spiral begun 
with The Psychology of the Transference and Psychology and Alchemy. It 
had its genesis in his own life — in his original grasp of the mysti- 
cal aspect of sexuality, reportedly met within the role of guiding 
spirit or soror mystica experienced with Toni Wolff?! and again in 
the mystical wedding encountered during his near-death experi- 
ence, both symbolized in the work of medieval alchemy. 


The fact that the very idea of mystical marriage was to play 
such an important role in alchemy is not surprising, inas- 
much as the expression usually used for it, coniunctio, refers 
primarily to what is today called chemical combination, and 
what brings together the elements to be combined is today 
known as “affinity”; but earlier various designations were 
used which all expressed human, and in particular, erotic 
relationships, such as nuptiae (wedding), matrimonium and 
coniugium (marriage), amicitia (friendship), attractio (attrac- 
tion) and adulatio (flirtation).9? 


In Mysterium Coniunctionis, Jung synthesizes aspects common 
to alchemy, Gnosticism, Christian mythology, and Indian Tantrism 
through the symbol of the hierosgamos or mystic wedding. He saw, 
too, that the sixteenth-century alchemistic stages of first separating 
and then uniting the opposites parallels the individuation process. 


‘ARL JUNG 


WOUNDED HEALER OF THE SOU 


Lingam and Yoni Draped with Pearls 


Painting on wood, back cover of a Saiva 
manuscript, Nepal, c. 1450. 


Indian thought associates cosmic 
unification and transformation with the 
symbolic combination of the lingam and 
the yoni. The union is the font of creativity 
from which new life flows. 


The symbols that emerge are very much the same as those pro- 
duced in contemporary dreams or meditation. 

Similarly, what raises the individual to a higher level of con- 
sciousness is the combining of what has first been separated. The 
outward combining process, be it sex, chemistry, or religious act, is 
symbolic of an inward state of unification and transformation. Ulti- 
mately the whole human being merges with the Ground of All 
Being, echoing universal mystic experience. 

For the alchemists, the first and second stages result in the one- 
ness of mind and soul with the body. 


The third and highest degree of conjunction was the union 
of the whole man with the unus mundus... the potential 
world of the first day of creation, when nothing was yet “in 
actu," i.e. divided into two and many but was still 
one... the eternal Ground of all empirical being. . . . 

The third degree of conjunction is universal: it is rela- 
tion or identity of the personal with the suprapersonal 
atman, and of the individual tao with the universal tao. . . . 

He [the alchemist Dorn] expressly meant not a fusion of 
the individual with his environment, or even his adaptation 
to it, but a unio mystica with the potential world. ... 
Undoubtedly the idea of the unus mundus is founded on 
the assumption that the multiplicity of the empirical world 
rests on an underlying unity... everything different and 
divided belongs to one and the same world. . . . 

All that is not encompassed by our knowledge, so that 
we are not in a position to make any statements about its 
total nature. ... But this much we do know beyond all 
doubt, that empirical reality has a transcendental back- 
ground. ... The common background of microphysics and 


PART THREE: OF THE SOUL MYSTERIUM CONIUNCTIONIS 185 


Chakrasamvara and 
Vajravarahi in Union 


Painting on cotton, Nepal, 
c. 1450 


The union of Tantric 
deities can embody unio 
mystica at the levels of the 
synthesis of opposites: 

the conscious and uncon- 
scious, the personal with 
the suprapersonal. 


PART THREE: OF THE SOUL 


depth psychology is as much physical as psychic and there- 
fore neither, but rather a third thing, a neutral nature which 
can at most be grasped in hints since in essence it is tran- 
scendental. ... The transcendental psychophysical back- 
ground corresponds to a "potential world.". . . 

The third and highest conjunction ... would consist, 
psychologically, in a synthesis of the conscious with the 
unconscious. The result of this conjunction or equation is 
theoretically inconceivable, since a known quantity is com- 
bined with an unknown one; but in practice as many far- 
reaching changes of consciousness result from it as atomic 
physics has produced in classical physics. . . . 

Not unnaturally, we are at a loss to see how a psychic 
experience of this kind — for such it evidently was — can be 
formulated as a rational concept. Undoubtedly it was meant 
as the essence of perfection and universality, and, as such, it 
characterized an experience of similar proportions. We 
could compare this only with the ineffable mystery of the 
unio mystica, or tao, or the content of samadhi, or the expe- 
rience of satori in Zen, which would bring us to the realm of 
the ineffable and of extreme subjectivity where all the cri- 
teria of reason fail. Remarkably enough this experience is 
an empirical one in so far as there are unanimous testi- 
monies from the East and West alike, both from the present 
and from the distant past, which confirm its unsurpassable 
subjective significance. . .. It is and remains a secret of the 
world of psychic experience and can be understood only as 
a numinous event.9? 


MYSTERIUM CONIUNCTIONIS 


187 


ita r 
put Le 


| Uw, 
CT PAN CN 
PRUNES IITA | 


WOUNDED [HE 5ot 


OPPOSITE 
Detail of A Lion at Rest 


Manuscript painting, India, 
Mughal Period, c. 1585. 


Even at rest there is an 
alert readiness in the 
bearing of a lion, who is a 
prime symbol of royal 
power and astrologically 
of solar power. Jung was 
born under the zodiac 
sign of Leo. 


Part THREE: OF THR Sorn 


Late Company 


White the widowed Jung had daughters and a daughter-in-law 
to stay with him in turns, he was looked after on a day-to-day basis 
by two women. Ruth Bailey, an old friend of the family, was invit- 
ed to "come and see me out" as companion-housekeeper. "You're 
an old humbug,” she would say to him when he seemed to contra- 
dict himself and he would roar with laughter and answer, "You're 
quite right."54 

Aniela Jaffé, ex-patient, friend, and administrative secretary of 
the Jung Institute was called in as private secretary. To both women 
he gave the same warning: 


I was expected, Jung explained, never under any circum- 
stances to allow myself to be irritated by his anger, nor his 
occasional “grumbling,” his roaring and cursings. . . ! 

In the early days of my secretaryship I was often on ten- 
terhooks as Jung read through the letters | put before him 
for signature. Every typing mistake was reproachfully and 
copiously commented on, but what a recompense it was 
when in his zeal he went too far and found himself in error! 
| soon learnt to turn the tables on him and use the weapon 
that never failed: | made him laugh or at least tried to. When 
a tempest had really broken loose, however, this weapon no 
longer worked, and then there was no recourse but to ask 
oneself, in all seriousness, how one had precipitated the 
storm, and stand up to it. In spite of his preliminary warning, 
it was anything but easy to let his rage pass over my head. 
But if | succeeded and managed to appear for work the next 
day unshaken and unhurt, nobody was more grateful than 
he. Although most times no further mention was made of 
the tempest, now and then... a word was dropped or 
something unexpected happened, that expressed his 
thanks. The preciousness of these responses caused the 
importance of the bygone to shrink to nothing. . . . The rare 
occasions when "gale force ten" was reached, Jung out of 
genuine magnanimity begged my pardon. 

His impatience was due not only to his temperament — 
astrologically he was a Leo — but also to his extreme 
sensitivity, which both enriched and burdened his life. It 
was an enrichment because it gave him . . . extraordinarily 
differentiated awareness . . . it was a burden because it 
encroached upon the personal realm and manifested itself 


T.aTRCOMPANY 180 


as touchiness. Jung was touchy, 
his feelings were easily hurt and 
needed sparing in order to display 
themselves. ... 

He began telling me about him- 
self and the sensitiveness that had 
tormented him from early youth, 
how it had encumbered him in his 
relationships and made him feel 
unsure of himself, how ashamed it 
had made him feel, but how, 
because of this same impression- 
ability, he had perceived beauties 
and experienced things other peo- 
ple scarcely dreamed of. 


Jaffé confessed that the “10 A.M. 
approach of the old magician never lost its 
excitement.” An “immense” correspon- 
dence, writing, which was always toil for 
him, and visitors took up the working day. 
For relaxation, Jung played solitaire in 
the evenings, occasionally “helping fate a 
little by switching the cards around” in 
“unabashed cheating.” Detective stories, 
especially Simenon and English thrillers 
“lay around everywhere,” the detective 
considered “a modern version of the alchemical Mercurius, solver 
of all riddles.” Science fiction ranked up with them in popularity. 

Music he listened to sparingly because, as he told pianist Mar- 
garet Tilly, “music is dealing with such deep archetypal material 
and those who play don’t realize this. Yet, used therapeutically 
from this level, music should be an essential part of every analy- 
sis."96 It "expresses in sounds what fantasies and visions express in 
visual images ... music represents the movement, development 
and transformation of motifs of the collective unconscious."57 

Jaffé reports "a penchant for Negro spirituals" along with Bach, 
Handel, Mozart, and early music. A string quartet of Schubert had 
to be turned off because "it moved him too much," while 
Beethoven's late quartets "churned him up almost beyond 
endurance." "Bach," he said to a friend, "speaks to God. I am 
gripped by Bach. But I could slay a man who plays Bach in banal 
surroundings."95 


190 CARL JUNG 


Greek Attic vase, 
c. 490 B.C.E. 


Hermes, the Great Riddler 
with boots as swift as 
thought, became the 
Roman Mercury, who 
gave his intelligence to 
the later alchemists in 
their quest to transmute 
lead into gold. 


WOUNDED HEALER OF THE SOUL 


Sound, Point 


Painting by Francesco 
Clemente, 1990. 

In later life, Jung believed 
music should be an 
essential part of active 
therapy and said it 
expressed in sound the : 
collective unconscious. 


Bollingen continued to be his place of renewal where he cus- 
tomarily played his childlike games, which served as release when- 
ever he got stuck in a problem. 

As the neighboring Henry K. Fierz observed, 


One could often meet Jung, sitting before his tower, pon- 
dering about | do not know what, and playing with a little 
watercourse, using a little garden shovel fixed to a broom- 
stick. The also very old man, Mr. Kuhn, who looked after the 
tower... once said to me, “If one sees the Professor, sitting 
and playing like this, if one would not know that this is a 
world-famous scientist, one would think that this is a very 


queer man who behaves in a rather odd way."9? 


PART THREE: OF THE SOUL LATE COMPANY 101 


It was only now that Bollingen reached comple- 
tion — materially and symbolically. 


After my wife's death . . . | felt an inner oblig- 
ation to become what | myself am. To put it in 
the language of the Bollingen house, | sud- 
denly realized that the small central section 
which crouched so low, so hidden was myself! 
| could no longer hide myself behind the 
“maternal” and the “spiritual” towers. So, in 
that same year, | added an upper story to this 
section, which represents myself, or my ego- 
personality. Earlier, | would not have been 
able to do this; | would have regarded it as 
presumptuous self-emphasis. Now it signified 
an extension of consciousness achieved in old 


age. With that the building was complete.” oe x : 

«e Mo 
Dear Aniela... . QUA ENS 
I have finished painting the ceiling in Bollin- r Gx e 
gen and done more work on my inscription 
and — last but not least — rebricked the rivulets to prevent Jung on a wall 
seepage and cooked some good meals and found and at Bollingen, c. 1955. 
bought an excellent wine. All this has rested me and cured In his eighties, Jung 
me of various vexations. But | won’t speak of that. Thank needed solitude as a 
heavens I have no idea how great is the disorder or order of “fount of healing,” and 
my correspondence. My memory has the most astonishing silence to overcome the 


holes in it, so that 1 often catch myself forgetting not only “torment” of talking: 


what I have done but more especially what | have not 
done.?! 


At eighty-two, silence and solitude were prime needs. Noise he 
fled "whenever and wherever possible" because it not only dis- 
turbed the concentration needed for his work but also "forces me to 
make the additional psychic effort of shutting it out." Modern noise 
like “technological gadgetry,” gramophone, radio, and “now the 
blight of television,” he described as something that was“predom- 
inantly extroverted and abhors all inwardness. It is an evil with 
deep roots" because “it drowns the inner instinctive warning" and 
“all goes together with the spiritual disorientation of our time."?? 


Solitude is for me a fount of healing which makes my life 
worth living. Talking is often a torment for me, and | need 


192 CARL JUNG WouNDED HEALER OF THE SOUL 


Silence 


Painting by Odilon Redon, 
c. 1911. 


Harpocrates, the god of 
silence, expresses a soul- 
gesture demonstrating 
the need to hold in our 
energy in order to hear 
our inner voice. 


PART THREE: OF THE SOUL 


many days of silence to recover from the futility of words. | 
have got my marching orders and only look back when 
there's nothing else to do. This journey is a great adventure 
in itself, but not one that can be talked about at great 
length. What you think of as a few days of spiritual commu- 
nion would be unendurable for me with anyone, even my 
closest friends. The rest is silence! This realization becomes 
clearer every day as the need to communicate dwindles.? 


LATE COMPANY 


101 


Memories Dreams Reflections 


But his main communications with the general public were still to 
come. His “autobiography” he came to reluctantly; it was “the one 
thing I’m not going to write” he had said in 1948. Strictly speaking, 
it is not an autobiography. He always spoke and wrote of it as 
“Aniela Jaffe’s project,” with contributions made by him in the 
form of childhood, travel, and closing chapters. The title Memories, 
Dreams, Reflections describes it very clearly — events of outer life 
scarce, those of inner life abounding. It includes what Jaffe termed 
“Jung's religious testament.” 


I often asked Jung for specific data on outward happenings, 
but I asked in vain. Only the spiritual essence of his life's 
experience remained in his memory, and this alone seemed 
to him worth the effort of telling.?* 


His sensitivity to the work's possible re ption he xplained him 
self. 


| have guarded this material all my life, and have never 
wanted it exposed to the world; for if it is assailed, I shall be 
affected even more than in the case of my other books. . . . 
I have suffered enough from incomprehension and from the 
isolation one falls into when one says things that people do 
not understand. . . . The "autobiography" is my life, viewed 
in the light of the knowledge I have gained from my scien- 
tific endeavors. . .. My life has been in a sense the quintes- 
sence of what | have written, not the other way around. The 
way | am and the way I write are a unity. All my ideas and all 
my endeavors are myself. Thus the "autobiography" is mere- 
ly the dot on the i. ® 


Artist Mary Crile visited Jung in that period 


The last time | saw Jung face to face... I found him much 
aged but there was the same kindly twinkle behind those 
penetrating eyes of his. When he said, "Pull up your chair, 
for | am getting deaf and old and stupid,” | could not help 
smiling as ! reminded him that he had made exactly the 
same remark to me, just eleven years earlier. He replied with 
a chuckle “Well, it doesn't seem to get any better". . . 


Oedipus Considers the 
Riddle 


Bronze by Glyn Warren 
Philpot, 1930. 

As Jung aged, the riddle 
of the meaning of life 
remained an enigma, an 
open mystery to be 
forever pondered. 


PART THREE: OF THE SOUL 


When | asked him what he was writing he said, “My 
biography. ... It is purgatory. Frau Jaffe is writing it but | 
must check it all because no one knows someone else’s life. 
I have done the first twenty years because one can be more 
objective there.” He paused and then added thoughtfully, “I 
don’t know the meaning of life.” As he said this | felt that, 
even for Jung, who more than anyone else in our day saw 
life steadily and saw it whole, there still remained an 
unsolved mystery. ?6 


MzMoRIES, DREAMS, REFLECTIONS 


195 


Author Erich Neumann gave this tribute to Jung as a human 


Human Being 


being: 


C. G. Jung is the only really great man I have met in my life, 
and as a teacher and friend over three decades he has pro- 
vided me with ever new vital material for love and outrage, 
with the erratic quality of humanity-transcending nature 
itself. Encountering in a man, with all his weaknesses and in 
all his greatness, that which is greater than man and in 
which nonetheless everything human is rooted, was for me 
a decisive and direction-setting experience.’ 


In the last years of his life, with world events like Soviet sup- 
pression of Hungary, British in Suez, and Chinese in Tibet as daily 
dramas, Jung's communication shows repeated concern for the 


earth, its future, and the individual's role. 


196 


The world today hangs by a thin thread, and that is the psy- 
che of man... . It is not the reality of the hydrogen bomb 
that we need to fear, but what man will do with it.9? 


A change in the attitude of the individual can bring about a 
renewal in the spirit of the nations.?? 


The whole future, the whole history of the world, ultimate- 
ly springs as a gigantic summation from these hidden 
sources in individuals. In our most private and subjective 
lives we are not only the passive witnesses of our age, and 
its sufferers, but also its makers. We make our epoch. 109 


We are living in what the Greeks called the right moment 
for a “metamorphosis of the gods," of the fundamental prin- 
ciples and symbols. This peculiarity of our time, which is 
certainly not of our conscious choosing, is the expression of 
the unconscious man within us who is changing. . . . 

As at the beginning of the Christian era, so again today 
we are faced with the problem of the general moral back- 
wardness which has failed to keep pace with our scientific, 
technical and social progress. . . . 

Happiness and contentment, equability of mind and 
meaningfulness of life — these can be experienced only by 


CARL JUNG 


WouNDED HEALER OF THE SOUL 


Tibetan Monk at Prayer in 
Mountain Cell 


Photograph by Ernst Haas. 


Jung was well aware of the 
ironies of modern life. 
Here a Tibetan monk has 
voluntarily walled himself 
nto a mountain cell to 

way for the benefit of 
iumankind. Since 1959, 

he Chinese have out- 
awed this practice under 
ienalty of imprisonment. 


'ART THREE: OF THE SOUL - 


ne individual and not by a State, which, on the one hand, is 
othing but a convention agreed to by independent indi- 
iduals and, on the other, continually threatens to paralyze 
nd suppress the individual. . . . The social and political cir- 
umstances of the time are certainly of considerable signif- 
cance, but their importance for the weal or woe of the 
idividual has been boundlessly overestimated in so far as 
ney are taken for the sole deciding factors. In this respect 
Il our social goals commit the error of overlooking the psy- 
hology of the person for whom they are intended and — 
ery often — of promoting only his illusions.!?' 


verything now depends on man; immense power of 
estruction is given into his hands, and the question is 


(UMAN BEING 


17 


"Aa" FA" 


F 


K, AT, 


198 CARL JUNG WOUNDED HEALER OF THE SOUL 


Vision of 1914 
Painting by C. G. Jung, 
1920. 

Jung, who had visions of 
destruction before World 
War I and li, spoke repeat- 
edly of man's power to 
"destroy his own planet." 
To offset it, he advocated 
amore responsible rela- 
tionship with God. 


PART THREE: OF THE SOUL 


whether he can resist the will to use it, and can temper his 
will with the spirit of love and wisdom. He will hardly be 
able to do so on his own resources. He needs the help of an 
“advocate” in heaven.10? 


Just as man, as a social being, cannot in the long run exist 
without a tie to the community, so the individual will never 
find the real justification for his existence and his own spir- 
itual and moral autonomy anywhere except in an extra- 
mundane principle capable of relativizing the overpowering 
influence of external factors. The individual who is not 
anchored in God can offer no resistance on his own 
resources to the physical and moral blandishments of the 
world. For this he needs the evidence of inner, transcendent 
experience which alone can protect him from the otherwise 
inevitable submersion in the mass.!03 


We have become participants of the divine life and we have 
to assume a new responsibility. ... Man's relationship to 
God probably has to undergo a certain important change: 
Instead of the propitiating praise to an unpredictable king 
or the child’s prayer to a loving father, the responsible living 
and fulfilling of the divine love in us will be our form of wor- 
ship of, and commerce with, God. His goodness means 
grace and light and his dark side the terrible temptation of 
power. Man has already received so much knowledge that 
he can destroy his own planet. Let us hope that God's good 
spirit will guide him in his decisions, because it will depend 
on man's decision whether God's creation will continue. 
Nothing shows more drastically than this possibility how 
much of divine power has come within reach of man.104 


HUMAN BEING 


199 


When John Freeman asked Jung in a 1959 BBC interview if he 
believed in God, he answered, “I don’t need to believe . . . I know,” 
thereby landing himself in controversy again. To correspondents 


Jung and God 


he wrote: 


Mr. Freeman in his characteristic manner fired the question 
you allude to at me in a somewhat surprising way, so that | 
was perplexed and had to say the next thing which came 
into my mind. As soon as the answer had left the “edge of 
my teeth" | knew I had said something controversial, puz- 
zling, or even ambiguous. | was therefore just waiting for 
letters like yours.’ 


When | say that 1 don’t need to believe in God because | 
“know,” | mean | know of the existence of God-images in 
general and in particular. I know it is matter of a universal 
experience and, in so far as | am no exception, I know that | 
have such experience also, which | call God. It is the expe- 
rience of my will over against another and very often 
stronger will, crossing my path often with seemingly disas- 
trous results, putting strange ideas into my head and 
maneuvering my fate sometimes into most undesirable cor- 
ners or giving it unexpected favorable twists, outside my 
knowledge and my intention. The strange force against or 
for my conscious tendencies is well known to me. So I say: 
^| know Him.” But why should you call this something 
^God"? | would ask: "Why not?" It has always been called 
"God" 106 


In his scientific writing, Jung always spoke of the “God-image,” 


Manjushri, Bodhisattva of 


pointing to its universal manifestations. In correspondence and Transcendental Wisdom 
conversation, he made more direct and personal statements. 


200 


| find that all my thoughts circle around God like the plan- 
ets around the sun and are as irresistibly attracted by Him. I 
feel it would be the grossest sin if | were to offer any resis- 
tance to this force.1°” 


The Divine Presence is more than anything else. There is 


more than one way to the rediscovery of the genus divinum 
in us. This is the only thing that matters. ... | wanted the 


CARL JUNC 


Temple hanging, 
appliqué of silks and 
leather on satin, Tibet, 
c. seventeenth century. 


Manjushri is dedicated 
to fearless proclamation 
of the Law. Jung felt 
strongly that he must 
speak out about the 
religious aspects of 
self-knowledge. 


WOUNDED HEALER OF THE SOU 


PART THREE: OF THE SOUL JUNG AND GOD 201 


proof of a living Spirit and | got it. 
Don't ask me at what a price.... I 
don't want to prescribe a way to 
other people, because | know that 
my way has been prescribed to me 
by a hand far above my reach. 1 
know it all sounds so damned 
grand. I am sorry that it does, but I 
don't mean it. It is grand and | am 
only trying to be a decent tool and 
don't feel grand at all. 108 


Elizabeth Howes writes, 


From the first moment I met him 
... till the last time | saw him — 
when he said, "Go on talking about 
the religious aspects of my work. 
They are the most important parts" 
— | was involved in probing with 
him the whole religious process of 
individuation. . . . 

Regardless of what he tried to 
do in remaining scientific in his 
writing, when he talked to me face 
to face he left no doubt in my mind 
that when he spoke of God he was 
speaking of more than the arche- 
type of God. This is sharply empha- 


sized in a statement he made after he had been talking most Shuffle-shoon and 

movingly about the use and need of prayer. “Why do I have Amberlocks 

to talk about God? Because He is everywhere! | am only the Painting by 

spoon in His kitchen.^109 Maxfield Parrish, c. 1920. 
Throughout his life Jung 

In a letter to Laurens van der Post, Jung declares, found natural wisdom and 


creative answers when he 
consulted with the child 


i fine f hat God is. l 
cannot define for you what God is. | can only say that in himself. 


my work has proved empirically that the pattern of God 
exists in every man and that this pattern has at its disposal 
the greatest of all his energies for transformation and trans- 
figuration of his natural being. Not only the meaning of 
his life but his renewal and his institutions depend on his 
conscious relationship with this pattern of his collective 
unconscious. 10 


202 CARL JUNG WOUNDED HEALER OF THE SOU: 


The Pilgrim on the Road 
Woodcut, 1530 


Late letters and accounts 
by Jung bear witness to 
his continuing role as a 
pilgrim on the road 
between East and West. 


PART THREE: OF THE SOU: 


But was there fusion with God? The "unio mystica with the 
potential world" — the third stage of conjunction written of but not 
experienced by the alchemists? A "synthesis of the conscious and 
unconscious?" Freedom from opposites? 

In his last years there are hints in Jung’s letters that his forehead 
still held back that millimeter from the floor. 


Eastern philosophy fills a psychic lacuna in us but without 
answering the problem posed by Christianity. Since | am 
neither an Indian nor a Chinese, | shall probably have to rest 
content with my European presuppositions, otherwise | 
would be in danger of losing my roots for a second time. 
This is something | would rather not risk, for | know the 
price one has to pay to restore a continuity that has been 
lost. 


I cannot subscribe to your statements . . . although they 
bring you perilously close to the ideal of Yoga: nirvana [free- 
dom from the opposites]. | know those moments of libera- 
tion come flashing out of the process, but | shun them 
because | always feel at such a moment that I have thrown 
off the burden of being human and 
that it will fall back on me with redou- 
bled weight.!!? 


I tried to find the best truth and the 
clearest light 1 could attain to, and 
since | have reached my highest point 
| can't transcend any more, | am 
guarding my light and my treasure, 
convinced that nobody would gain 
and | myself would be badly, even 
hopelessly injured, if | should lose it. It 
is most precious not only to me, but 
above all to the darkness of the cre- 
ator, who needs man to illuminate His 
creation." 


Chilean diplomat and writer Miguel Ser- 
rano, who formed a late close relationship 
with Jung, observed: 


Up until the last moment Jung still 
seemed to be searching. Perhaps his 


TUNG AND GOD 203 


Seated Figure of 
Bodhidharma 


Porcelain, Chinese, 
Ming Dynasty, first half of 
seventeenth century. 


Bodhidharma was an 
Indian sage who brought 
Buddhism into China. This 
figurine is a meditative 
aid. By sitting in the same 
position and gazing upon 
the figure of the Bodhi- 
dharma, one can see one's 
own inner state. 


was the road of the Magician who, unlike the Saint, did not 
yearn for fusion or for the peace of God, but preferred the 
eternal highway with all its unhappiness. But | cannot be 
certain of that.!!^ 


For all that, Jung, living out the final patterns of his life, contin- 
ued to feed cosmic answers to the small boy within himself who 


204 CARLJUNG WOUNDED HEALER OF THE SOUL 


used to sit on a stone, wondering, “Am I the one who is sitting on 
the stone, or am I the stone on which he is sitting?” 


In one dream, which I had in October 1958, | caught sight 
from my house of two lens-shaped metallically gleaming 
disks, which hurtled in a narrow arc over the house and 
down to the lake. They were two UFOs. Then another body 
came flying directly toward me. It was a perfectly circular 
lens, like the objective of a telescope. At a distance of four 
or five hundred yards it stood still for a moment, and then 
flew off. Immediately afterward, another came speeding 
through the air: a lens with a metallic extension which led to 
a box — a magic lantern. At a distance of sixty or seventy 
yards it stood still in the air, pointing straight at me. | awoke 
with a feeling of astonishment. Still half in the dream, the 
thought passed through my head: “We always think the 
UFOs are projections of ours. Now it turns out that we are 
their projections. | am projected by the magic lantern as 
C. G. Jung. But who manipulates the apparatus?” 

| had dreamed once before of the problem of the self 
and the ego. In that earlier dream | was on a hiking trip. | 
was walking along a little road through a hilly landscape; the 
sun was shining and I had a wide view in all directions. Then 
| came to a small wayside chapel. The door was ajar, and | 
went in. To my surprise there was no image of the Virgin on 
the altar, and no crucifix either, but only a wonderful flower 
arrangement. But then | saw that on the floor in front of the 
altar, facing me, sat a yogi — in lotus posture, in deep med- 
itation. When I looked at him more closely, | realized that he 
had my face. | started in profound fright, and awoke with 
the thought: “Aha, so he is the one who is meditating me. 
He has a dream, and | am it.” | knew that when he awak- 
ened, | would no longer be. ... 

The aim of both these dreams is to effect a reversal of 
the relationship between ego-consciousness and the 
unconscious, and to represent the unconscious as the gen- 
erator of the empirical personality. This reversal suggests 
that in the opinion of the "other side," our unconscious exis- 
tence is the real one and our conscious world a kind of illu- 
sion, an apparent reality constructed for a specific purpose, 
like a dream which seems a reality as long as we are in it. It 
is clear that this state of affairs resembles very closely the 
Oriental concept of Maya." 


PART THREE: OF THE SOUL JUNG AND GOD 205 


Christ and the Wise 
Virgins 

Stone portal, Germany. 
At eighty-three, Jung 
had a dream in which he 
addressed a multitude 
of ordinary people who 
listened with rapt atten- 
tion and understanding. 
This prompted him to 
agree to the publication 
of his last book, Man and 
His Symbols. 


Last Work 


Man and His Symbols, Jung’s last work, had a typical birth. The 
highly successful Freeman interview prompted a publisher’s 
request for a book of Jung’s “more important and basic ideas,” this 
time “for the people in the market place.” No, said eighty-three- 
year-old Jung. He had never tried to popularize his work; anyway 
he was “old and rather tired.” 

Then he had a dream, which he told to John Freeman. 


Jung dreamed that, instead of sitting in his study and talking 
to the great doctors and psychiatrists who used to call on 
him from all over the world, he was standing in a public 
place and addressing a multitude of people who were lis- 
tening to him with rapt attention and understanding what 
he said.!!6 


Inner instinct was heeded and the publisher’s second request 
was accepted. Jung’s contribution to the book was completed only 
ten days before his death, “his legacy to the broad reading public,” 
wrote John Freeman, from “one of the great doctors of all time and 
one of the great thinkers of this century.” 


206 CARL JUNG WOUNDED HEALER OF THE SOUL 


PART THREE: OF THE SOUL 


Small Comfort 


That Jung felt his voice was too little heard and even less under- 

stood in his time is clear from letters of the last couple of years to 

the few who did bring him succor. Swiss political economist Pro- 

fessor Eugen Bohler attempted in many publications to apply 

Jung’s ideas to a more comprehensive economic science and later 

wrote an introduction to a paperback anthology of Jung’s writings. 
Jung sent greetings. 


To you, dear friend . . . for this dawning decade 1960-70, in 
whose lap the black and white cards of our uncertain fate 
await us. The past decade dealt me heavy blows — the 
death of dear friends and the even more painful loss of my 
wife, the end of my scientific activity and the burdens of old 
age, but also all sorts of honors and above all your friend- 
ship, which I value the more highly because it appears that 
men cannot stand me in the long run. Since I do not deem 
myself God-almighty enough to have made them other than 
they are, I must put it down entirely to my own account and 
lengthen my shadow accordingly. Your understanding and 
your interest have done much to restore my self-confi- 
dence, severely shaken by my incessant struggle with diffi- 
cult contemporaries. It is indeed no trifling thing to be 
granted the happy proof that somehow one is “possible” 
and has achieved something whose meaning someone else, 
apart from myself, is able to see. Being well-known not to 
say “famous” means little when one realizes that those who 
mouth my name have fundamentally no idea of what it’s all 
about. The gratification of knowing that one is essentially 
posthumous is short-lived.117 


The Catholic Mother Prioress of a contemplative order wrote to 
Jung of the great influence his writings had on herself and her com- 
munity — around the time when Jung was complaining that he had 
dealt so frequently with the problem of religion in his work that “I 
have been alternately accused of agnosticism, atheism, materialism 
and mysticism.” 

Jung replied, 


Rev. Mother Prioress, 


| am very grateful for the spiritual help you extend to me. | 
am in need of it with this gigantic misunderstanding which 


SMALL COMFORT 207 


surrounds me. All the riches | seem to possess are also my 
poverty, my lonesomeness in the world. The more | seem to 
possess, the more | stand to lose, when | get ready to 
approach the dark gate. I did not seek my life with its fail- 
ures and accomplishments. It came to me with a power not 
my own. Whatever I have acquired serves a purpose | have 
not foreseen. Everything had to be shed and nothing 
remains my own. | quite agree with you: it is not easy to 
reach utmost poverty and simplicity. But it meets you, 
unbidden, on the way to the end of this existence.""8 


Jung now described himself as "an eighty-five-year-old ruin of 
a formerly capable man." In honor of what was to be his last birth- 
day, Sir Herbert Read, art historian and writer, published a critique 
about Jung's ideas on the arts. 

Jung wrote as thanks, 


Dear Sir Herbert. ... 


Your blessed words are the rays of a new sun over a sluggish 
swamp in which | felt buried. | often thought of Meister Eck- 
hart, who was entombed for six hundred years, and asked 
myself time and again why there are no men in our epoch 
who could see at least what I was wrestling with. I think it is 
not mere vanity and desire for recognition on my part, but 
a genuine concern for my fellow-beings. It is presumably 
the ancient functional relationship of the medicine-man to 
his tribe, the participation mystique and the essence of the 
physician's ethos. | see the suffering of mankind in the indi- 
vidual's predicament and vice versa. ? 


In January 1961, Jung received confirmation of himself from an 
unexpected quarter with a belated letter of thanks from William 
Wilson, “Bill W," co-founder of Alcoholics Anonymous. In it he 
acknowledged how Jung’s remarks to a chronically alcoholic 
patient, Rowland H., in 1931 — that his situation was hopeless 
unless “he could become the subject of a spiritual or religious expe- 
rience, in short a genuine conversion” — had been instrumental in 
Bill W’s own conversion and cure, leading to the foundation of 
Alcoholics Anonymous in 1934. 

The long account concluded: 


As you will now clearly see, this astonishing chain of events 
actually started long ago in your consulting room, and it 


208 CARL JUNG WOUNDED HEALER OF THE SOUL 


Angel of Mercy of the 
Graveyard 


Marble sculpture, Vieques, 
Puerto Rico, early twentieth 
century. 

Photograph by M. Klaus. 


On the death of an 
estranged friend, Jung, in 
the last decade of his life, 
wrote: 


The hidden mystery of life 
is always hidden between 
Two, and it is the true 
mystery which cannot be 
betrayed by words or 
depleted by arguments.'2° 


was directly founded upon your own humility and deep 
perception. 

Very many thoughtful A. A’s are students of your writ- 
ings. Because of your conviction that man is something 
more than intellect, emotion, and two dollars worth of 
chemicals, you have especially endeared yourself to us.!21 


Jung’s response was illuminating. 


Dear Mr. W.... 


Those days I had to be exceedingly careful of what | said. | 
had found out that | was misunderstood in every possible 
way. Thus | was very careful when | talked to Rowland H. 
But what | really thought about was the result of many 
experiences with men of his kind. 

His craving for alcohol was the equivalent, on a low 
level, of the spiritual thirst of our being for wholeness, 
expressed in medieval language: the union with God. 

How could one formulate such an insight in a language 
that is not misunderstood in our days? l 

The only right and legitimate way to such an experience 
is that it happens to you in reality, and it can only happen to 


PART THREE: OF THE SOUL SMALL COMFORT 209 


Bottle Spirit 


Photograph by 
Peter Angelo Simon, 1995. 


Jung knew the 

craving for “spirits” could 
also be, unconsciously, 
the spiritual thirst and 
yearning for a deeper 
union with God. 


PART THREE: OF THE SOUL 


you when you walk on a path which leads you to higher 
understanding. ... 

| am strongly convinced that the evil principle prevailing 
in this world leads the unrecognized spiritual need into 
perdition if it is not counteracted either by real religious 
insight or by the protective wall of human community. An 
ordinary man, not protected by an action from above and 
isolated in society, cannot resist the power of evil which is 
called, very aptly, the Devil. But the use of such words 
arouses so many mistakes that one can only keep aloof from 
them as much as possible. . . . 

| am risking it with you because | conclude from your 
very decent and honest letter that you have acquired a point 
of view above the misleading platitudes one usually hears 
about alcoholism. 

You see, "alcohol" in Latin is spiritus, and you use the 
same word for the highest religious experience as well as 
for the most depraving poison. The helpful formula. there- 
fore is: spiritus contra spiritum. 

Thanking you again for your kind letter, | remain, 


Yours sincerely, 
C. G. Jung??? 


SMALL COMFORT 


211 


Self-Assessment 


The old man who said “I stand isolated between the faculties” 
wasn’t given to see the degree to which he had already shifted the 
furniture in people’s minds in the humanities, sciences, religions, 
arts, and everyday human behavior. Nor could he foresee his ever- 
present influence on the Human Potential Movement and 
Transpersonal Psychology, on universalists like mythologist Joseph 
Campbell or Franz Alt, who acknowledged his recognition of “reli- 
gion as dynamite and not opium through him.” 

But Jung always knew at heart that his life, if understood, 
pointed a way. 


If 1 ask the value of my life, 1 can only measure myself 
against the centuries and then | must say, Yes, it means 
something. Measured by the ideas of today, it means 
nothing.?3 


'ARL JUNG WOUNDED HEALER OF THE SOU 


Wang Hsi-chih Watching 
Geese 

Detail from painted hand- 
scroll by Ch’ien Hsuan (c. 
1235-1300), China. 


PART THREE: OF THE SOUL 


The difference between most people and myselí is that for 
me the "dividing walls" are transparent. That is my peculiar- 
ity. Others find these walls so opaque that they see nothing 
behind them and therefore think nothing is there. To some 
extent | perceive the processes going on in the background, 
and that gives me an inner certainty. People who see noth- 
ing have no certainties and can draw no conclusions — or 
do not trust them even if they do.'24 


In each aeon there are at least a few individuals who under- 
stand what man's real task consists of, and keep its tradition 
for future generations and a time when insight has reached 
a deeper and more general level. First the way of a few will 
be changed and in a few generations there will be more... 
whoever is capable of such insight, no matter how isolated 
he is, should be aware of the law of synchronicity. As the old 
Chinese saying goes: "The right man sitting in his house and 
thinking the right thought will be heard a hundred miles 
away." 25 


SELF-ASSESSMENT 


213 


On May 6, 1961, too frail for his daily walk, Jung was driven 
around some of his favorite roads, saying goodbye to the country- 
side. Three separate wedding processions stopped the car’s 
progress. Synchronicity, decided Jung, announcing his impending 
wedding with death. Four days later, Miguel Serrano was one of 
his last visitors. Jung received him in his study dressed in a “Japan- 
ese ceremonial gown, his Gnostic ring on his left hand, Teilhard de 
Chardin’s book The Human Phenomenon, ‘a great book,’ by his side.” 
Serrano reports being “once again struck by the magnificent 


Return to Source 


rigor of Jung’s mind” in that conversation. 


Today no one pays attention to what lies behind words... 
to the basic ideas that are there. Yet the idea is the only 
thing that is truly there. What | have done in my work, is 
simply to give new names to those ideas, to those realities. 
Consider, for example, the word “Unconscious.” | have just 
finished reading a book by a Chinese Zen Buddhist. And it 
seemed to me that we were talking about the same thing, 
and that the only difference between us was that we gave 
different words to the same reality. Thus use of the word 
Unconscious doesn't matter; what counts is the idea that 
lies behind the word.'?6 


Two slight strokes resulted in bed for a week. Marie-Louise von 


Franz was a visitor. 


When | last saw him he had a vision. “I see enormous 
stretches devastated, enormous stretches of the earth. But 
thank God it's not the whole planet.”127 


Three days before he died, Jung dispatched his son Franz to his 


cellar, saying, "Let's have a really good wine tonight." 


214 


Ruth Bailey later wrote to Miguel Serrano, 


For two days before he died he was away in some far coun- 
try and he saw wonderful and beautiful things, | am sure of 
that. He smiled often and was happy... he told me of the 
wonderful dream he had had; he said: “Now | know the 
truth but there is a small piece not filled in and when I know 
that I shall be dead.” Also after that he had a wonderful 
dream which he told me in the night. He saw a huge round 


CARL JUNC 


WouNDED HEALER OF THE Sot 


Meditating Daruma Facing 
the Wall 


Inkbrush painting, 
Nobutada (1565-1614), 
Japan. The calligraphy 
reads, “Quietness and 
emptiness are enough/to 
pass through life without 
error.” 


jung realized he had 
given new names to 
realities known to other 
cultural systems. Chinese 
Zen Buddhism refers to 
the knowledge of the 
unconscious in terms 
similar to Jung’s 
constructs. “What counts 
is the idea that lies 
behind the word.” 


Part THREE: OF THE SOUL 


V apicc — d 


block of stone sitting on a high plateau and at the foot of the 
stone was engraved these words: "And this shall be a sign 
unto you of Wholeness and Oneness.”128 


At 4 P.M. on June 6, 1961, Jung died very peacefully, surrounded 
by his family. Not surprisingly, synchronicity accompanied his 
death. Laurens van der Post, on a voyage from Africa to Europe, 
reported a dream at the time he died of Jung waving goodbye. Bar- 
bara Hannah told how, minutes before his death, she discovered 
the relatively fresh battery in her car had completely run down. 
Nature joined in a couple of hours later with a freak storm over 
Küsnacht in which lightning struck and scarred the tree where Jung 
used to sit in the garden. 

Jungian analyst June Singer was then studying at the Institute. 


I never saw him during his lifetime. . .. On the day after his 
death | was one of a few trainees who went sorrowfully to 
Küsnacht. . . . The front door was open. I went in and wait- 
ed in the fabled library, now hushed. A woman | did not 
know motioned me toward the stairway and I understood I 
was to go up alone. One door stood ajar in the upstairs hall. 


RETURN TO SOURCE 215 


| entered the darkened room, lit only by two flickering can- 
dles in tall candlesticks on either side of the bed. There on 
the bed lay the waxen figure of the great man, so slender, so 
frail, seeming to be so small, almost transparent, peacefully 
at rest in his old-fashioned white nightshirt. A powerful 
presence pervaded the room and I stood there for a long 
moment, allowing the cool and glowing silence to penetrate 
my being. Then | turned and walked slowly down the 
stairs.129 


Carl Gustav Jung was buried in Kiisnacht cemetery. The family 
gravestone, designed by him, has inscribed on the top and bottom 
borders: 


Vocatus atque non vocatus deus aderit 
Called or not called, the god will be there 


On the right and left sides is carved, from the First Epistle to the 
Corinthians: 


Primus homo de terra terrenus 

Secundus homo de caelo caelestis 

The first man is of the earth and is earthly, 
the second man is of heaven and is heavenly. 


The prologue of Jung’s “autobiography” sums up his story: 


Life has always seemed to me like a plant that lives on its 
rhizome. Its true life is invisible, hidden in the rhizome. The 
part that appears above ground lasts only a single summer. 
Then it withers away — an ephemeral apparition. When we 
think of the unending growth and decay of life and civiliza- 
tions, we cannot escape the impression of absolute nullity. 
Yet | have never lost a sense of something that lives and 
endures underneath the eternal flux. What we see is the 
blossom, which passes. The rhizome remains.130 


216 CARL JUNG 


OPPOSITE 
Untitled 


Photograph by 
Jerry Uelsmann, 1964. 


WOUNDED HEALER OF THE SOUL 


Notes 


Abbreviations of frequently cited works: 


MDR: Memories, Dreams, Reflections by C. G. Jung, recorded and 
edited by Aniela Jaffé (New York: Vintage Books, 1989). 


L1: C. G. Jung Letters Volume 1, selected and edited by Gerhard 
Adler in collaboration with Aniela Jaffé (London: Routledge 
and Kegan Paul, 1972). 


L2: C. G. Jung Letters Volume 2, selected and edited by Gerhard 
Adler in collaboration with Aniela Jaffé (Bollingen Series; 
Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1953). 


JET: C. G. Jung, Emma Jung, Toni Wolff (San Francisco: The Analytic 
Psychology Club of San Francisco, Inc., 1982). 


F/J: The Freud/Jung Letters, edited by William McGuire (London: 
Hogarth Press and Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1974). 


CW: The Collected Works of C. G. Jung (London: Routledge and 
Kegan Paul). 


PART ONE — WOUNDED 


. JET, pp. 51-52. 

. L1, p. 377, letter to P. W. Martin. 
. L1, p. 19, footnote. 

. L2, p. 408, letter to Anonymous. 
. MDR, p. 8. 

. MDR, pp. 17-18. 


. Jung: A Biography by Gerhard Wehr (Boston: Shambhala, 
1987), pp. 29-30. 


8. MDR, pp. 9-210. 
9. MDR, pp. 11-12. 
10. MDR, pp. 13-15 and 23. 
11. MDR, p. 15. 
12. MDR, p. 19. 
13. MDR, pp. 21-22. 
14. MDR, pp. 36-42. 


do Ui i WN 


WOUNDED HEALER OF THE SOUL NOTES 219 


220 


. MDR, pp. 52, 50. 

. MDR, pp. 42-43. 

. Wehr op. cit. p. 58-59. 

. MDR p. 99. 

. Wehr op. cit. p. 74. 

. Jung's Last Years by Aniela Jaffé (Dallas, Tex.: Spring Publica- 


tions Inc., 1984), p. 2. 


. MDR, pp. 72-73. 
. MDR, pp. 108-109. 

. MDR, p. 114. 

. MDR p. 127. 

. MDR, p. 131. 

. MDR, p. 117. 

. Wehr op. cit., p. 91. 

. MDR, p. 370, Appendix 2. 

. MDR, p. 367. 

. F/J, pp. 4-5. 

. F/J, p. 5. 

. MDR, pp. 149-150. 

. Jolande Jacobi, Oral History Project, cited in Uncovering Lives: 


The Uneasy Alliance of Biography and Psychology by Alan C. 
Elins (New York: Oxford University Press, 1994), pp. 68-69. 


. F/J, pp. 94-95. 
. F/J, pp. 96-97. 

. F/J, p. 325. 

. F/J, pp. 181, 183. 

. F/J, p. 184. 

. F/J, pp. 199-200. 

. F/J, p. 200. 

. F/J, p. 208. 

. F/], p. 212. 

. F/J, p. 207. 
. F/J, p. 228. 

. F/J, pp. 230-231. 

. F/J, p. 236. 

. MDR, pp. 155-156. 


CARL JUNG WOUNDED HEALER OF THE SOUL 


48. 
49. 
50. 
51. 
52. 
53. 
54. 
55. 
56. 
57. 
58. 
59. 
60. 
61. 
62. 
63. 
64. 
65. 
66. 
67. 
68. 
69. 


70. 


71. 
72. 
73. 
74. 
75. 
76. 
77. 


78. 
79. 


WOUNDED HEALER OF THE SOUL 


F/J, pp. 218-220. 
MDR, pp. 150-151. 
MDR, p. 158. 

F/J, p. 452. 

F/J, pp. 456—457. 
F/J, p. 467. 

F/J, p. 509. 

F/J, p. 510. 

F/J, p. 516. 

F/J, p. 524. 

F/J, pp. 525-526. 
F/J, p. 534. 

F/J, pp. 534-535. 
F/J, pp. 538-539. 
MDR, pp. 167-168. 
MDR, pp. 170, 173-175. 
MDR, pp. 175-176. 
MDR, pp. 176-179. 
MDR, pp. 179-182. 
MDR, p. 189. 

F/J, p.4 40. 


Jung: His Life and Work by Barbara Hannah (Boston: 
Shambhala), p. 120. 


Jung and the Story of Our Time by Laurens van der Post 
(New York: Random House, 1975), p. 177. 


Hannah, op. cit. p. 119. 
MDR, pp. 182-183. 
MDR, pp. 183-184. 
MDR, pp. 184-185. 
MDR, p. 188. 

MDR, pp. 190-192. 


A Record of Two Friendships by Miguel Serrano (London: 
Routledge and Kegan Paul), pp. 94-95. 


MDR, pp. 195-196. 
MDR, pp. 192, 199. 


NOTES 


221 


PART Two HEALER 


O ON HD OF i» WN RS 


Y 
PON - © 


15. 
16. 
17. 
18. 
19. 
20. 
21. 
22. 
23. 
24. 
25. 
26. 
27. 


28. 
29. 
30. 
31. 


222 


. JET, p. 67. 

. Last Years, Jaffé, op. cit., p. 167. 

. L2, p. 323, letter to Henry A. Murray. 

. L2, p. 316, letter to Elined Kotschnig. 

. L2, p. 474, letter to A. Tjoa and R. H. C Janssen. 
. JET, p. 39. 

. JET, p. 17. 

. MDR, p. 240. 

. MDR, pp. 247-248, 251-252. 

. MDR, pp. 255-256. 

. MDR, pp. 224-226, 237. 

. F/J, p. 294. 

. MDR, p. 340. 

. C. G. Jung Speaking, edited by William McGuire and R. F. C 


Hull (London and New York: Thames and Hudson, 1978), 
p. 348. 


MDR, p. 205. 

MDR, p. 209. 

L1, p. 87, letter to A. Vetter. 

JET, p. 97. 

Jung, Hannah, op. cit., p.74. 

MDR, p. 145. 

JET, pp. 51-52. 

JET, p. 98. 

L2, pp. 276-277, letter to Theodor Bovet. 
JET, p. 120. 

L2, p. 481, letter to Traugott Egloff. 
L2, p. 402, letter to Anonymous. 


Jung: Man and Myth by Vincent Brome. (London: 
HarperCollins), pp. 212-213. 


CW 10, "Civilization in Transition" p. 125. 

L1, pp. 82-83, letter to Count Hermann Keyserling. 
L1, pp. 108-109, letter to Anonymous. 

L1, p. 239, letter to Anonymous. 


CARL JUNG 


WOUNDED HEALER OF THE Sot 


32. The Secret of the Golden Flower, translated by Richard Wilhelm 
(London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1974), p. 126. 


33. Ibid., p. 126. 

34. JET, pp. 111-112. 

35. L1, p. 375, letter to Olga Frobe-Kapteyn. 
36. L2, pp. 258-259, letter to Pastor Walter Bernet. 
37. L1, p. 236, letter to Aniela Jaffé. 

38. JET, p. 119. 

39. Ibid., p. 112. 

40. L1, p. 59, letter to Anonymous. 

41. JET, p. 103. 

42. MDR, p. 133. 

43. Jung, van der Post, p. 128. 

44. Ibid., pp. 121-122. 

45. JET, pp. 103-104. 

46. Last Years, Jaffé, op. cit., pp. 106—107. 

47. Jung, Wehr, op. cit., p. 329. 

48. JET, pp. 99-100. 

49. MDR, p. 144. 

50. JET, pp. 104-105. 

51. L1, p. 41, letter to Oscar A. H. Schmitz. 
52. L1, p. 422, letter to J. Allen Gilbert. 

53. L1, p. 133, letter to Frau V. 

54. JET, p. 75. 

55. Jung, van der Post, op. cit., p. 4. 

56. L1, p. 561, letter to Sibylle Birkhauser-Oeri. 
57. JET, pp. 50-51. 

58. JET, pp. 47-48. 

59. JET, pp. 32-33. 

60. C. G. Jung Speaking, McGuire and Hull, op. cit., pp. 50-51. 
61. Jung, Hannah, op. cit., p. 199. 

62. JET, pp. 116-117. 

63. Last Years, Jaffé, op. cit., p. 113. 

64. JET, p. 98. 

65. L1, p. 86, letter to Anonymous. 

66. L1, p. 135, letter to Poul Bjerre. 


WouNDED HEALER OF THE SOUL Notre 


67. L1, pp. 145-146, letter to Walter Cimbal. 

68. CW 10, p. 534. 

69. Ibid., p. 538-541. 

70. L1, p. 157, letter to E. Beit von Speyer. 

71. L1, pp. 154-155, letter to Dr. B. Cohen. 

72. L1, p. 162, letter to James Kirsch. 

73. L2, p. xxxiv, letter to Henry A. Murray. 

74. L1, p. 404, letter to J. H. van der Hoop, January 14, 1946. 
75. Jung, Hannah, p. 269. 

76. L1, p. 276, letter to Esther Harding. 

77. MDR, pp. 275-277. 

78. MDR, p. 277. 

79. CW 10, “What India Can Teach Us,” par. 1013. 
80. MDR, pp. 282-283. 


PART THREE — OF THE SOUL 


. L2, p. 580, letter to Earl of Sandwich. 

. MDR, pp. 210-211. 

. Jung, Hannah, op. cit., pp. 264-265. 

. L1, p. 285, notes. 

. L1, pp. 285—286, letter to H. G. Baynes. 
. MDR, pp. 289-296. 

. L1, p. 343, letter to Anonymous. 

. Jung, Hannah, op. cit., p. 283. 

. L1, pp. 424-425, letter to Eugene H. Henley. 
. L1, p. 422, letter to Ernst Anderes. 

. L1, p. 443, letter to Jolande Jacobi. 

. Jung, Brome, op. cit., p. 213. 

. L1, p. 377, letter to P. W. Martin. 

. Jung, Wehr, op. cit., p. 292. 

. JET, pp. 37-38. 

. JET, p. 118. 

. L1, p. 516, letter to Alwine von Keller. 
. L1, p. 568, letter to Hanna Oeri. 

. JET, p. 124. 


O AN BD Ui i» WN n 


"rr T 
O ON A Of WN FF Oo 


224 CARL JUNG WouNDED HEALER OF THE SOUL 


. Jung, Wehr, op. cit., p. 377. 

. MDR, p. 233. 

. L2, p. 137, letter to Fr. Victor White. 

. MDR, p. 297. 

. MDR, pp. 218-220. 

. L2, pp. 20, 112, 115, letters to Aniela Jaffé, Jacob Amstutz, 


Henry Corbin. 


. CW 11, Answer to Job, p. 357. 

. L2, pp. 155-156, letter to Rev. Erastus Evans. 

. L2, pp. 72-73, letter to Fr. Victor White. 

. L2, pp. 435-436, letter to Rev. Morton T. Kelsey. 
. CW 11, Answer to Job, p. 417. 

. CW 11, ibid., p. 470. 

. L1, p. 127, letter to Paul Maag. 

. L1, p. 66, letter to Walter Robert Corti. 

. L1, p. 392, letter to Pastor H. Wagmann. 

. L2, p. 436, letter to Rev. Morton Kelsey. 

36. 


L2, pp. 76-77, letter to Dorothee Hoch. 


37 L1, p. 96, letter to Anonymous 
38 L2, p. 183, letter to Anonymous 
39 L2, p. 4, letter to Heinrich Boltze 


40. 
. L1, p. 520, letter to Jurg Fierz. 

. Essay by Pastor Bernet, 1966. 

. L2, p. 222, letter to Fr. Victor White. 
. L2, pp. 108-109, letter to Carl Seelig. 
. C. G. Jung Speaking, McGuire and Hull, op. cit., pp. 325, 378. 
. L1, pp. 174-175, letter to Wolfgang Pauli. 

. Last Years, Jaffé, op. cit., p. 166. 

. L2, p. 308, letter to Professor Nelson. 

. C. G Jung Speaking, op. cit., p. 387. 

. L1, p. 548, letter to Edward Whitmont. 

. CW 14, Mysterium Coniunctionem, par. 662. 
. Synchronicity: An Acausal Connecting Principle, (London: Rout- 


WOUNDED HEALER OF THE SOUL 


L2, p. 77, letter to Dorothee Hoch. 


ledge and Kegan Paul), p. 7. 


. L2, pp. 398-400, letter to Stephen Abrams. 


NOTES 


225 


54. JET, p. 3. 

55. C. G. Jung Speaking, op. cit., p. 402. 

56. JET, p. 41. 

57. JET, p. 7. 

58. MDR, p. 225. 

59. L2, p. 117, letter to James Kirsch. 

60. L2, p. 121, letter to Countess Elizabeth Klinckowstroem. 
61. Jung, Hannah, op. cit., p. 313. 

62. L2, pp. 424—425, letter to Dr. Daniel Brody. 

63. Two Friendships, Miguel Serrano, op. cit., pp. 60-61. 


64. C. G. Jung Briefe, edited by Aniela Jaffé with Gerhard Adler, 
(Walther Verlag AG Ohten, 1972-73), p. 386. 


65. L2, p. 171, letter to Fr. Victor White. 

66. Evangelische Seelsorge by Walther Uhsadel, p. 121. 
67. Last Years, Jaffé, op. cit., p. 100. 

68. Jung, Hannah, op. cit., p. 323. 

69. L2, p. 270, letter to Mary Bancroft. 

70. JET, p. 120. 

71. JET, p. 34. 

72. L2, p. 251, letter to Fr. Victor White. 

73. JET, p. 95. 

74. L2, p. 284, letter to Erich Neumann. 

75. Jung, Brome, op. cit., p. 260. 

76. MDR, p. 296. 

77. L2, p. 316, letter to Marianne Niehus-Jung. 
78. Jung, van der Post, op. cit., p. 177. 


79. L2, p. 299, letter to Eugen Bohler; p. 233, letter to Manfred 
Bleuler. 


80. MDR, p. 356. 
81. A Matter of Heart film transcript, James Kirsch. 


82. Die Gesemmelten Werke von C. G. Jung 1958-70, "The Psychol- 
ogy of the Transference,” pp. 178-179. 


83. CW 14, Mysterium Coniunctionem, Vol. 2, pars. 760, 762, 
767-771. 


84. Jung, Brome, p. 257. 
85. Last Years, Jaffé, op. cit., pp. 101, 114-115. 


226 CARL JUNG WOUNDED HEALER OF THE SOUL 


WOUNDED HEALER OF THE SOUL 


86. 
87. 
88. 
89. 
90. 
91. 
92. 
93. 
94. 
95. 
96. 
97. 


98. 

99. 
100. 
101. 
102. 
103. 
104. 
105. 
106. 
107. 
108. 
109. 
110. 
111. 
112. 
113. 
114. 
115. 
116. 


117. 


118. 


JET, p. 126. 

L1, p. 542, letter to Serge Moreux. 
C. G. Jung Speaking, op. cit., p. 249. 
JET, p. 16. 

MDR, p. 225. 

L2, p. 351, letter to Aniela Jaffé. 
L2, p. 88, letter to Karl Oftinger. 
L2, p. 363, letter to Gustav Schmaltz. 
MDR, pp. vii-viii. 

MDR, p. xii. 

JET, pp. 114-116. 


An Illustrated Biography of C. G. Jung by Gerhard Wehr 
(Boston: Shambhala, 1989), p. 143. 


Interview with Richard Evans, 1957. 
“Essay on Contemporary Events.” 


CW 10, The Meaning of Psychology for Modern Man, p. 149. 


CW 10, The Undiscovered Self, pp. 304-305. 
CW 11, Answer to Job, p. 459. 

CW 10, The Undiscovered Self, p. 258. 

L2, p. 316, letter to Elined Kotschnig. 

L2, p. 525, letter to M. Leonard. 

L2, p. 522, letter to Valentine Brooke. 

L2, p. 236, letter to Pater Lucas Menz. 

L1, pp. 491—492, letter to Fr. Victor White. 
JET, p. 120. 

Jung, van der Post, op. cit., p. 216. 

L2, p. 121, letter to Countess Elizabeth Klinckowstroem. 
L2, p.238, letter to Pater Lucas Menz. 

L2, p. 597, letter to Miguel Serrano. 

Two Friendships, Serrano, op. cit., p. 112. 
MDR, pp. 323-324. 


Man and His Symbols by C. G. Jung, introduction (London: 


Aldus Books, 1964), p. 10. 


L2, pp. 529-530, letter to Eugen Bo; p. 566, letter to Rev. 
Kenneth Gordon Lafleur. 


L2, p. 516, letter to Mother Prioress of a contemplative order. 


NOTES 


227 


119. L2, pp. 5 86-589, letter to Sir Herbert Read. 
120. L2, p. 581, letter to Mother Prioress. 


121. “The Bill W./Car] Jung Letters," A.A.’s Grapevine, 1963, 1968, 
1974. 


122. Ibid. 

123. MDR, p. xii. 

124. MDR, pp. 355-356. 

125. L2, p. 595, letter to Miguel Serrano. 
126. Two Friendships, Serrano, op. cit., p. 100. 
127. Jung, Marie-Louise von Franz. 

128. Two Friendships, Serrano, op. cit., p. 104. 
129. JET, p. 83. 

130. MDR, p. 4. 


228 CARL JUNG WOUNDED HEALER OF THE SOUL 


Sources 


TEXT CREDITS 


Adler, Gerhard and Aniela Jaffé, editors, C. G. Jung Letters, Volume 
I. Copyright © 1972 by Princeton University Press and Taylor & 
Francis Books Ltd., formerly International Thompson/Routledge. 
Reprinted by permission of Princeton University Press. 


Adler, Gerhard, and Aniela Jaffé, editors, C. G. Jung Letters, Volume 
II. Copyright © 1953 by Princeton University Press and Taylor & 
Francis Books Ltd., formerly International Thompson/Routledge. 
Reprinted by permission of Princeton University Press. 


Brome, Vincent, Jung: Man and Myth. Copyright © HarperCollins 
London. 


Hannah, Barbara, Jung: His Life and Work. Copyright © Shambhala 
Publications, Boston. Reprinted by kind permission of Ms. Marie- 
Louise von Franz. 


Jaffé, Aniela, Jung's Last Years. Copyright © Spring Publications, Inc. 
Reprinted by permission of Robert Hinshaw. 


Jensen, Ferne, editor, assisted by Sidney Mullen, Jung Emma Toni 
Copyright O 1982. Published by the Analytic Psychology Club of 
San Francisco and reprinted by their kind permission. 


Jung, C. G., The Collected Works of C. G. Jung. CW 10, 11, 14, 16 copy- 
right € Taylor & Francis Books Ltd., formerly International Thomp- 
son/Routledge. CW 10, 14 copyright © 1963, 1964 by Bollingen. 
Reprinted by permission of Princeton University Press. 


Jung, C. G., editor, Man and His Symbols. Copyright O 1964 Aldus 
Books Limited, London. 


Jung, C. G., Memories, Dreams, Reflections. Copyright © 1961, 1962, 
1963 by Random House, Inc. Renewed 1989, 1990, 1991 by Random 
House, Inc. Reprinted by permission. 


Jung, C. G., Seven Sermons to the Dead. Translated by H. C. Baynes 


Copyright € 1961, 1962, 1963 Random House, Inc. Copyright © 
1967 Vincent Stuart and John Watkins Ltd. 


WOUNDED HEALER OF THE SOUL SoURCES 220 


McGuire, William and R. F. C. Hull, editors, C. G. Jung Speaking. 
Copyright © 1977 Princeton University Press, copyright © 1978 
Thames & Hudson International Ltd., London and New York. 


McGuire, William, editor, The Freud/Jung Letters. Copyright © 1974 
Hogarth Press. Copyright © 1974 Taylor & Francis Books Ltd., for- 
merly International Thompson/Routledge, and Princeton Univer- 
sity Press. Reprinted by permission of Princeton University Press. 


Serrano, Miguel, A Record of Two Friendships. Copyright © Taylor & 
Francis Books Ltd., formerly International Thompson/ Routledge. 
Van der Post, Laurens, Jung and the Story of Our Time. Copyright © 
1975 Random House, Ine 


"The Bill W./C. G. Jung Letters," published in A. A. Grapevine, 1963, 
1968, 1974. 


Wehr, Gerhard, Jung: A Biography. Copyright € 1985, 1987 Sham- 
bhala Publications, Inc., Boston. Translation copyright € 1989 by 
Shambhala Publications, Inc. and René Cockelbergs Verlag AG, 
Lucerne, Switzerland. Reprinted by permission of Shambhala Pub- 
lications, Inc. and by kind permission of Gerhard Wehr. 


Wilhelm, Richard, translator, The Secret of the Golden Flower: A Chi- 
nese Book of Life, foreword and commentary by C. G. Jung. Copy- 
right © Taylor & Francis Books Ltd., formerly International 
Thompson/Routledge. 


230 CARL JUNG 


ART CREDITS 


Cover: Photo courtesy of K. Mann Library, NY. Painting from the 
Red Book copyright © Erbengemeinschaft C. G. Jung. 


Frontispiece: Harley MS #3469, British Library, London. 
PART ONE 


Frontispiece: Harley MS #3469. Copyright © British Library, 
London. 


Page 1: Private collection, Basel. Courtesy of Gallerie Bruno 
Bischofberger, Ziirich. 


Page 2: Photo courtesy of K. Mann Library, NY. 

Page 4: Photo copyright © Erbengemeinschaft C. G. Jung. 

Page 5: Photo copyright © Erbengemeinschaft C. G. Jung. 

Page 6: Photo copyright © 1981 Rosalie Winard, NY. . 

Page 7: Vatican Museum. Copyright © Scala/ Art Resource, NY. 
Page 8: Copyright € Art Resource, NY. 

Page 9: Copyright © Landesmuseum, Stuttgart, Germany. 

Page 10: Photo copyright € Erbengemeinschaft C. G. Jung. 
Page 11: Courtesy of the artist. Photo by Paul McCapia. 


Page 12: Copyright € Brooklyn Museum, gift of Mr. & Mrs. M. 
Lowenthal through the Roebling Society (68.160). 


Page 13: Photo copyright € Erbengemeinschaft C. G. Jung. 
Page 15: Courtesy of the artist, Tulsa, OK. 
Page 17: Photo copyright € Erbengemeinschaft C. G. Jung. 


Page 18: Musee d'Orsay, Paris. Copyright © Giraudon/ Art 
Resource, NY. 


Page 20: Copyright € Photo Marburg/ Art Resource, NY. 
Page 21: Photo courtesy of Stefanie Preiswerk. 

Page 22: Copyright © Art Resource, NY. 

Page 23: Photo copyright € Erbengemeinschaft C. G. Jung. 
Page 25: Photo copyright € Erbengemeinschaft C. G. Jung 
Page 26: Photo courtesy of K. Mann Library, NY. 

Page 27: Clark University, Worcester, MA. 


Page 29: Ms. Rhenaugiensis 172, fol. 10v, Zenralbibliothek, Zürich. 
Courtesy of the library. 


WOUNDED HEALER OF THE SOUL SOURCES 231 


Page 31: Photo courtesy of K. Mann Library, NY. 


Page 33: The Metropolitan Museum of Art, NY, The Berggruen 
Klee Collection, 1987. (1987.455.7) Photograph © 1984 The Metro- 
politan Museum of Art. 

Page 36: Photo courtesy of The Freud Museum, London. 

Page 39: Painting by Hans Hinz. Photo courtesy of K. Mann 
Library, NY. 

Page 43: Copyright O 1994, 1998 James Wasserman, from 

The Egyptian Book of the Dead (San Francisco: Chronicle Books). 
Courtesy of James Wasserman. 

Page 44: Photo copyright € 2000 Peter Angelo Simon, NY, 
www.PeterAngeloSimon.com. 

Page 46: Photo copyright € 2000 Peter Angelo Simon, NY, 
www.PeterAngeloSimon.com. 

Page 48: Copyright € Erbengemeinschaft C. G. Jung. 

Page 50: Courtesy of K. Mann Library, NY. 


Page 52: Copyright € Pierpont Morgan Library. Art Resource, NY. 


Page 53: From E. A. W. Budge, Book of the Dead (London: Keegan, 
Paul, 1899). 


Page 55: From C. W. King, The Gnostics and their Remains, 1887, in 
J. Wasserman, Art & Symbols of the Occult (Rochester, VT.: Destiny 
Books, 1993). 


Page 57: Copyright © Erbengemeinschaft C. G. Jung. 
Part Two 


Page 59: Copyright © Erbengemeinschaft C. G. Jung. 
Page 60: Photo courtesy of K. Mann Library, NY. 


Page 61: Sistine Chapel, Vatican Palace. Copyright © Scala/ Art 
Resource, NY. 


Page 62: Courtesy of the Museum Bochum, Kunstsammlung, 
Bochum. Used by permission. 


Page 64: Photo courtesy of K. Mann Library, NY. 
Page 65: Courtesy of Dr. Debrunner. 


Page 66: Pushkin Museum of Fine Arts, Moscow. 
Copyright © Scala/ Art Resource, NY. 


Page 67: Photo courtesy of Field Museum of Natural History, 
Chicago. 


232 CARL JUNG 


WouNDED HEALER OF THE SOUL 


Page 68: Courtesy of School of American Research, Sante Fe, NM. 


Page 69: Courtesy of the artist and Anthony d’Offray Gallery, 
London. 


Page 70: Photo copyright © Erbengemeinschaft C. G. Jung. 
Page 71: Photo copyright © Erbengemeinschaft C. G. Jung. 


Page 72: Copyright © 1994 Judith Margolis. Private collection, 
Jerusalem. 


Page 73: The Metropolitan Museum of Art, NY, The Dillon Fund 
Gift, 1988, (1988.155b). Photograph by Malcolm Varon. Photo- 
graph © 1991 The Metropolitan Museum of Art. 


Page 74: From Ernst & Johanna Lehner, Devils, Demons & 
Witchcraft (New York: Dover, 1971). 


Page 76: From E. A. W. Budge, Gods of the Eygptians (New York: 
Dover, 1904). 


Page 77: Photo courtesy of K. Mann Library, NY. 
Page 78: Photo courtesy of K. Mann Library, NY. 


Page 79: The Metropolitan Museum of Art, NY, Purchase, 
Florence and Herbert Irving Gift, 1991. (1991.300) 


Page 81: Arensberg Collection, Philadelphia Museum of Art, 
Philadelphia, PA. Photo copyright © 1998 G. Wood. 


Page 82: Copyright © 1991. Courtesy of the artist. 


Page 83: The Metropolitan Museum of Art, NY, Robert Lehman 
Collection, 1975. (1975.1.1416). Photograph © 1979 The Metropoli- 
tan Museum of Art. 


Page 84: Photo copyright © Clive Hicks. 


Page 85: The Metropolitan Museum of Art, NY, Gift of Lester 
Wunderman, 1977. (1977.394.15) 


Page 86: Copyright © 1981. Courtesy of artist. 


Page 87: The Metropolitan Museum of Art, NY, George A. Hearn 
Fund, 1915. (15.32) Photograph © 1989 The Metropolitan Museum 
of Art. 


Page 88: Bibliothéque N. ationale d’ Arsenal. Copyright © Snark/ 
Art Resource, NY. 


Page 89: Enzo by William Segal. 


Page 90: The Metropolitan Museum of Art, NY, Rogers Fund, 
1960. (60.145.11) Photograph © 1987 The Metropolitan Museum of 
Art. 


Page 91: Courtesy of K. Mann Library, NY. 


WOUNDED HEALER OF THE SOUL SOURCES 233 


Page 92: The Metropolitan Museum of Art, NY, Rogers Fund, 
1915. (15.2.2) Photograph © 1983 The Metropolitan Museum of 
Art. 


Page 93: Minister of Cultural ‘Affaire: Quebec. 


Page 94: Musee d'Orsay, Paris. Copyright © Erich Lessing / Art 
Resource, NY. 


Page 95: The Metropolitan Museum of Art, NY, The Berggruen 
Klee Collection, 1987. (1987.455.15) Photograph © 1986 The Met- 
ropolitan Musem of Art. 


Page 97: Copyright © National Museum of American Art, 
Washington, D.C./Art Resource, NY. 


Page 98: Photo copyright © 1988 Linda Connor. 


Page 99: The Metropolitan Museum of Art, NY, Gift of Douglas 
Dillon, 1986. (1986.266.4) Photograph © 1981 The Metropolitan 
Museum of Art. 


Page 101: Photo courtesy of K. Mann Library, NY. 
Page 103: Photo courtesy of K. Mann Library, NY. 
Page 104: Photo courtesy of K. Mann Library, NY. 


Page 105: The Metropolitan Museum of Art, NY, Gift of Janice H.: 
Levin, 1991. (1991.277.1) Photograph © 1992 The Metropolitan 
Museum of Art. 


Page 106: Courtesy of Walther Niehus. 

Page 107: Photo copyright © Karsh of Ottawa, Canada. 
Page 110: Photo courtesy of K. Mann Library, NY. 

Page 111: Photo courtesy of Prof. Dr. C. A. Meier, Zurich. 


Page 113: Copyright © Metropolitan Museum of Art, NY, Elisha 
Whittelsey Collection (1954.602.19(14). 


Page 114: Copyright © 1994 R. B. Kitaj. Tate Gallery, London 
(MU 1943)/ Art Resource, NY. 


Page 115: Copyright © Israel Museum, Jerusalem. 


Page 119: Copyright © Brooklyn Museum, NY, gift of Mr. & Mrs. 
R. L. Poster in honor of Dr. B. H. Schaffner (84.142). 


Page 120: Ajit Mookerjee Collection, India. 
Page 121: Harley Ms. #3469. Copyright © British Library, London. 


234 CARL [UNG WOUNDED HEALER OF THE SOUL 


PART THREE 


Page 123: Art Museum of Princeton University. Copyright © 
Trustees of Princeton University. 


Page 124: Courtesy of the artist. 


Page 125: Copyright © Museum of Modern Art, NY, gift of 
Mrs. Bertram Smith. 


Page 126: Copyright © Art Resource, NY. 


Page 127: The Metropolitan Museum of Art, NY, Purchase, Flo- 
rence and Herbert Irving Gift, 1992. (1992.131) Photograph © 1993 
The Metropolitan Museum of Art. l 


Page 129: Copyright © Museum of Modern Art, NY. 


Page 130: From Franc Newcomb, Shooting Chant (New York: 
Dover, 1975). 


Page 131: From D. Mowaljarlai and J. Malnic, Yorro Yorro 
(Rochester, VT.: Inner Traditions, 1993). Courtesy of the publisher. 


Page 132: From Ernst & Johanna Lehner, Devils, Demons & 
Witchcraft (New York: Dover, 1971). 


Page 133: Photo courtesy of K. Mann Library, NY. 

Page 134: Photo courtesy of Robert Johnson. 

Page 135: Photo courtesy of Robert Johnson. 

Page 137: Photo courtesy of K. Mann Library, NY. 

Page 138: Photo copyright © Erbengemeinschaft C. G. Jung. 
Page 139: Photo courtesy of K. Mann Library, NY. 


Page 141: From Ernst & Johanna Lehner, Devils, Demons & 
Witchcraft (New York: Dover, 1971). 


Page 142: Copyright © Art Institute of Chicago, Illinois. 


Page 143: From Ernst & Johanna Lehner, Devils, Demons & Witch- 
craft (New York: Dover, 1971). 


Page 145: The Metropolitan Musem of Art, NY, Gift of the family 
of Francis M. Bacon, 1914. (13.175) 


Page 147: The Metropolitan Museum of Art, NY, The Friedsam 
Collection, Bequest of Michael Friedsam, 1931. (32.100.82) Photo- 
graph © 1990 The Metropolitan Museum of Art. 


Page 148: Collection of Mr. & Mrs. Arthur G. Altshul. Photo by 
Christine Guest. 


Page 151: Copyright © Foto Marburg/ Art Resource, NY. 
Page 154: Photo copyright € 1989 Rosalie Winard. 


WOUNDED HEALER OF THE SOUL SOURCES 235 


Page 155: Private collection, NY. 


Page 156: Painting copyright © 1992, 1995 James and Nancy 
Wasserman. 


Page 158: Photo courtesy of NASA. 


Page 159: From E. A. W. Budge, Life in Ancient Egypt (New York: 
Dover, 1950). 


Page 161: Courtesy of the artist and Schmidt Bingham Gallery, 
NY. 


Page 162: Copyright © 1995. Courtesy of Craig San Roche. 


Page 163: The Metropolitan Museum of Art, NY, Francis M. Weld 
Fund, 1950. (50.164) Photograph © 1977 The Metropolitan Muse- 
um of Art. 


Page 164: Copyright © Joe Geshick. 
Page 166: Photo courtesy of Mickey Lemle, Lemle Pictures. 


Page 168: Biblioteca Statale, Lucca, Italy. Copyright © Scala/Art 
Resource, NY 


Page 169: From Robert Fludd, Summum Bonum, 1629. 

Page 170: Photo courtesy of K. Mann Library, NY. 

Page 172: Tate Gallery, London. Art Resource, NY. 

Page 173: Private collection, CA. Courtesy of Mrs. Alex Rapoport. 
Page 174: Photo courtesy of K. Mann Library, NY. 


Page 177: From Nik Douglas, Tibetan Charms (New York: 
Dover, 1978). 


Page 178: Photo courtesy of K. Mann Library, NY. 

Page 179: Photo courtesy of K. Mann Library, NY. 

Page 181: Photo copyright © Erbengemeinschaft C. G. Jung. 

Page 183: Harley Ms. #3469. Copyright © British Library, London 


Pages 184-185: Los Angeles County Museum of Art, gift of 
Dr. & Mrs. P. Pal [M.70.1.3]. 


Page 186: Los Angeles County Museum of Art, The Nasli & Alice 
Heeramaneck Collection [M.70.1.3]. 


Page 188: The Metropolitan Museum of Art, The Alice and Nasli 
Heeramaneck Collection, Gift of Alice Heeramaneck, 1985. 
(1985.221) Photograph © 1992 The Metropolitan Museum of Art. 


Page 190: Vatican Museum. Copyright © Art Resource, NY. 
Page 191: Courtesy of the artist. 
Page 192: Photo courtesy of K. Mann Library, NY. 


236 CARL JUNG WOUNDED HEALER OF THE SOUL. 


Page 193: Copyright © Museum of Modern Art, NY, 

Bliss Collection. 

Page 195: Copyright © Art Resource, NY. 

Page 197: Copyright © Alex Haas Studio, NY. 

Page 198: Copyright © Erbengemeinschaft C. G. Jung. 

Page 201: The Metropolitan Museum of Art, NY, Kennedy Fund, 
1915. (15.95.154) Photograph © 1991 The Metropolitan Museum of 
Art. 

Page 202: From Eugene Field, Poems of Childhood (New York: 
Scribners, 1932). 

Page 204: The Metropolitan Museum of Art, NY, Gift of Mrs. 
Winthrop W. Aldrich, Mrs. Arnold Whitridge, and Mrs. Sheldon 
Whitehouse, 1963. (63.176) 

Page 206: Copyright © Art Resource, NY. 

Page 209: Photo copyright © 1990 M. Klaus. 

Page 210: Photo copyright © 1995 Peter Angelo Simon, NY, 
www.PeterAngeloSimon.com. 

Pages 212-213: The Metropolitan Museum of Art, Gift of The 
Dillon Fund, 1973. (1973.120.6) Photograph © 1981 The Metropoli- 
tan Museum of Art. 

Page 215: From Stephen Addis, The Art of Zen (New York: 
Abrams, 1989). 

Page 217: Photo copyright © Jerry Uelsmann. 


The editors would like to thank Alison Jasonides, Art Resource, NY; 
Annmari Ronnberg, ARAS, The Jung Center of NY; and Michelle 
McKee, Khristine Mann Library, The Jung Center of NY. 


Every attempt has been made to obtain permission to reproduce 
material protected by copyright. Where omissions may have 
occurred, we will be happy to acknowledge this in future printings. 


WouNDED HEALER OF THE SOUL ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 237 


Acknowledgments 


Although the writing of this book was necessarily a loner’s task on 

the outside, its substance is derived from interaction with the huge 
presence of Carl Gustav Jung, backed by the unfathomable Source 
of Life that inspires, and conspires with, each of us to play our role 
in its service. In my case, as messenger, I have thankfully met with 
allies along the way. 

To Joseph Kulin, as publisher and enduring friend, I owe a 
special expression of gratitude for his persistent belief in my 
manuscript and taking the gamble on its publication. 

PARABOLA'S idea of presenting the text as an illustrated book has 
added more to it than I could have dreamed of for myself. In addi- 
tion, they have given me the rare opportunity to be included at each 
stage of production. 

I'd like to pay tribute to art researcher Miriam Faugno, whose 
empathy of soul is visible in her choice of images; to designer Jim 
Wasserman's enthusiastic creation of an elegantly spare presenta- 
tion; and to David Appelbaum’s discriminating direction of the 
production assisted by the meticulous work of Natalie Baan and 
Shanti Fader. 

I also wish to thank each of PARABOLA'S staff for small personal 
gestures that helped this traveling stranger find a sense of family. 

Without Pauline Thompson's financial endorsement this book 
could not have gone into production. Her hospitable, enlivening 
friendship is a bonus that I treasure. 

Esteemed author and lecturer Olivier Bernier, who directs the 
Van Waveren Foundation, was the first to acknowledge the manu- 
script with a publication development grant. His additional under- 
writing of a promotional speaking tour has ensured the book's reach 
to a wider general audience than would otherwise be possible. 

Jean Houston, whose inspirational teaching ability and warm 
personality I've always admired, gave early active support for the 
text, and generously agreed to write an introduction in the midst of 
huge demands on her time. 

In the project's earliest stages my soul friend Dr. Fred Kyneur 
lent me his library of Jung books for two patient years, and scholar 
Kenji Tanaka stoically initiated me into the maze of computer 
technology. 

To each individual, and numerous others who have added 
pieces, professional and personal, to the overall tapestry, I acknowl- 
edge your contribution with heartfelt thanks. 

Finally, to you as intended reader, I joyfully release this book on 
its journey into its own life. 

$$$$ Who wrote this book ? $$$$